It's not necessarily how much you have.
It's just a contrast to what you have
before. Would you rather have a net
worth of a million dollars when you used
to have 2 million or would you rather
have a net worth of 500,000 when you
used to have 200,000? And
psychologically, most people would
rather have 500,000. The speed at which
a luxury becomes a necessity is 2
seconds.
>> What advice do you have for somebody
living paycheck to paycheck?
>> I always say two things. One is that the
second is
affordable housing I think is the single
biggest social problem because so many
other social problems that might seem
bigger than that are downstream of
housing. A lot of the drug problem, the
fertility crisis, the degradation of
politics because if you don't feel like
you're invested in your community or
you're invested in your country, it's
much easier to be like burn the place
down. And so much I wrote this in
psychology money. If you have to sort of
like sum up doing well financially in
one word, I think it's
>> you've been incredibly successful and
sold over 10 million books. What drives
you today?
>> Well, you've been incredibly successful,
too, Shane. I've looked up to to you for
years as well. But I bring that up. I
think that's an important thing to bring
up because what has driven me are people
like you and and others James Clear,
Michael Lewis, people who I've really
looked up to and not been so crazy to
say I want to be that person one day. Uh
both because they're it's it's that's
that's not, you know, everyone should
just do it in their own way. But I've
I've always been uh I think there's a
difference between envy and and
aspiration. You can be really inspired
by somebody's success without envying
them.
And the, you know, if I can name half a
dozen people that I've really looked up
to and say like, man, they've they're a
good role model. But the important thing
is I don't envy them. I can also name
half a dozen people I won't who I who
I've envied. And when I when I try to
get introspective about that, why do I
envy that person? It's usually it's
because they achieved a level of
success, but I didn't like how they did
it. And that's a subjective thing. Maybe
they're all they're all good people in
their own right. I won't be too
judgmental, which I won't name them. But
I I think I think it's an important
distinction. uh people in your life who
inspire you versus you envy them. And I
think everyone, if they're honest,
probably has a, you know, some of both.
But I really I I like looking up to
people where it's like, not only do I
appreciate what you did professionally
and think you did it with a high level
of integrity and and you look like
you're having fun doing it, but at least
from my appearance, I like the whole
package of the life that you're living.
And that's really important because
there's also a lot of people,
particularly in finance, who I can say,
man, career-wise, you did amazing, but
as I get to know you, I realize that
your home life isn't that great and your
health isn't that great. Or maybe you
don't actually enjoy your life. And so,
do I actually want to chase what you've
achieved? Like, no, maybe not. And so,
you ask what inspires me. I think it's
it I I think it's I think it's that
having people in your life that you look
up to and you can use as as a north star
is important. The other that I think is
really important, I think this was a
Buffett line. He said, "It is really
good to have people in your life who you
don't want to disappoint. Nothing is a
bigger motivator in life than having a
couple people, rarely more than that,
that you really don't want to
disappoint. I really desperately do not
want to disappoint my wife and kids. I
really don't want to disappoint my
parents." That's that's fundamental. I
think most people will have they'll have
their own version of that, but something
like that. And nothing is more of a
motivator than that to want to leave to
live a good life. But if you look back
30 years ago and you could see what
you've accomplished today, the financial
success, the uh status success that
you've had, you you've blown away any
goal that you would have had. Why keep
going?
I think in a healthy way, I can have a
very split personality of on one hand, I
can say, man, I'm really good at what I
do and I'm I'm achieving a lot and this
is amazing. And then I can very quickly
flip a switch and say, "I'm a nobody and
I'm I've done some really bad work
lately." And I think on balance, that's
a that's a pretty healthy personality
because if you only have the ego side,
you're going to run yourself off a
cliff. And if you only have the
humble/depressed side, you're never
going to get anywhere. And so I've been
pretty good at being able to toggle back
and forth sometimes, you know, within
the same hour, certainly within the same
day. And so what keeps you going? A I I
really enjoy what I do. Writing has
never felt like work to me. And I think
that's I think it's the same for you.
It's just an extension of kind of who
you are. It's never felt like work. And
so I enjoy doing it. But also what keeps
me going is like the healthy side of me.
Part of me says like I can keep doing
this and do good work. And then a minute
later the other bird on the shoulder
being like you suck. You suck at this.
And again on net I think it's a very
healthy personality even if it's just
the two extreme sides.
>> What can money do for us and what can it
do for us?
It can do a list of positive things for
everybody. What I think is true is that
on average, people who have more money
tend to have fewer bad days, but I don't
know if they have more better days. I
think it is more likely that when you
have more money, you are less likely to
wake up and be like, man, things are not
going well. But that doesn't necessarily
mean that you're going to wake up
grinning ear to ear. Now, that's a
lifestyle improvement. If you have fewer
bad days, that's like great. Your life
your life is better. That's obviously
better than the alternative, but it's
not happiness. It's a very different
thing. And I think it can throw some
people off when they are when they
aspire to happiness or they think that
what they're achieving in the money
they're making should make them happy.
Sometimes it does. Very often it
doesn't. And they wake up and they're
like, "What happened?" Like I thought
this was going to make me happy, but I'm
not. So, I think there's a level of
expectation setting where it's like I
think h I think money can be more like a
vaccine where like it can prevent a lot
of misery, which is great. Vaccines are
wonderful. Like we don't have polio.
It's a great thing, but maybe that's a
good analogy because you and I don't
wake up in the morning being like, "Oh,
I'm so glad I don't have polio. So
grateful for the fact we don't do that.
We don't we don't think about it." And I
think that's a lot of what money can do.
It is a lifestyle improvement, but don't
think it's going to make you waking up
ear to ear, grinning ear to ear.
>> It's kind of like oxygen in a way, I
guess, right? When you have it, you
never think about it, but the minute
you're lacking it, it's all you can
think about.
>> But we want to think of it like it's a
per a performance-enhancing drug. We
want to think of it as like we're going
to take it and just be like, "Oh, I'm on
fire now. This is great." And I think
for short periods of time, it can do
this. Happiness is always a fleeting
emotion. Like most people are rarely
happy for more than a couple minutes at
a time. And I think it's very similar to
humor where if I tell you a very funny
joke, you don't laugh for 10 years. You
laugh for a couple minutes. Humor is a
fleeting emotion. And happiness is the
same. Most people, you have moments of
it. And you can situate your life. So
maybe you have more moments of it than
others and more than you used to, but
it's momentary. And so I think what
people actually want to get to, what
they aspire to whether they know it or
not, is contentment, which is not
happiness. It's a different emotion.
You'd want to get to a point where
you're just like, I'm I'm good. Like I'm
very grateful for everything that I have
and I have everything that I need and
most of what I want and I'm totally cool
with that. And if there's more to come
above this, that's the cherry on top.
But I'm really cool here. I'm great
right here. And I think most people can
realize that with a lot of work and
constant upkeep, you can get to that you
can get to that level at a lower income
than you think.
>> I remember talking to Daniel Common
about this and he had a distinction
between happiness and satisfaction.
>> Yeah.
>> And the distinction was happiness is an
emotion. Most people think they want to
be happy, but it turns out um that most
people want to be satisfied.
>> Yeah. And satisfaction was more based on
the story that you can tell about your
life. So it actually had to do with how
much money you had, how much status you
had, how much you um how many promotions
you had. You were able to tell yourself
the story that I did. I sacrificed all
these things. Maybe my relationship with
my partner
>> um in order to achieve them.
>> Yeah. And I think it's uh when you
daydream about having more success or
more money or more stuff. When you day
when you do that daydream and it feels
good and you're like, "Oh, if only I had
that house. If only I had that car. If
only I had this income." By and large,
what you are doing is imagining yourself
having those things and being totally
content with them. And that's what feels
good. That's why the daydream is fun to
do. But by and large, when you imagine
that good feeling, it's not happiness.
You imagine yourself in the house being
like, "This is it. This is all I need. I
don't need this is this is this is the
peak of what I need. More often what
happens is if you are in that house
you're like ah man look at my neighbor
like their yard's a little nicer, isn't
it? Or like ah like I got this kitchen
but like I saw this picture on
Instagram. What if we what if we
remodeled it? Like what actually happens
is you don't have a level of
contentment. And I don't think
contentment is a dirty word. It's not a
bad thing particularly overall in the
economy. I want to live in a world where
most people particularly smart people
wake up every day and they're like this
isn't enough. We need more innovation.
We got to start more successful
businesses. That is the root of all
progress is that the majority of people
wake up every morning and says this is
not enough. And the people who are
monstrously successful that Elon Musk
and Jeff Bezos, they wake up still, you
know, I guarantee you Elon Musk wakes up
every day worth $400 billion saying this
isn't enough. Not even necessarily
financially, although there might be
that element, but like the technology is
not good enough. The products aren't
good enough. We need more, more, more.
And so the lack of contentment is the
seed of progress. So it's not a bad
thing. But you can see in the individual
life where if you feel like there's a
hole in your soul and you're you're just
not you just feel like you haven't done
enough, you just want more. That the
idea of like, oh well, if I just keep
shoveling money in that hole, then I'll
get to a place where I'm good. It's
actually very difficult to do that. That
makes sense sort of evolutionarily
because you think about it, evolution
cares about survival of the species, not
the happiness of the individual.
>> Give a damn how happy you are. Yeah.
>> And the other thing about with evolution
is like it doesn't matter how much money
I have. What matters is that I have more
than you.
>> It doesn't matter how fast I can run.
It's got to run faster than you. And so
in a world where we are like lucky
enough to live in relative uh prosperity
and abundance relative to previous eras,
um I'm going to measure my success
relative to you and the size of my house
relative to yours. So even if the size
of my house by historical standards is
enormous, if my neighbors is bigger,
then suddenly it feels tiny. And there's
like there's no end to that. you like
you can easily imagine a world where our
kids and our grandkids have technology
and abundance that you and I cannot
fathom. I mean the most what I think is
like the highest odds is that our kids
maybe our grandkids will live in an era
which being diagnosed with cancer is not
not that big a deal. Maybe that's still
a pipe dream but like it's it's not
inconceivable to imagine that. And the
other thing about that world is you can
imagine that they won't feel any better
for it. that the the speed at which a
luxury becomes a necessity is is is is
two seconds. And I think that was true
for a lot of the uh infectious diseases
of of the 20th century. Scarlet fever,
yellow fever, polio, all those. If you
had told them, if you had told a parent
in 1952 that there was a vaccine coming
that would just effectively eradicate
polio and your and your grandkids would
never have to worry about that. They
would have said like, I can't imagine
how happy you're going to be that you
don't have to deal with this. And we're
not. Of course, it's not. It's just not
how people's heads just instantly
calibrate to the standards of what
everybody else has. And that is the seed
of saying it's not enough. We're very
like almost never going to get to a
point where we're like no matter how
good the technology is, no matter how
good the medicine is, no matter how big
the houses are, never get to a point
where at a broad scale in society,
everyone wakes up and says, "Oh, good.
This is enough."
I remember when I was 17 and um I
overheard a conversation with my parents
and their financial advisor that the
military had provided. So both my
parents worked for the military
full-time and they were trying to decide
whether to fix the roof or fix the car
and they couldn't afford to do both. And
I remember just thinking in that moment,
I never want to be in this situation.
Yeah.
>> Uh where I have to choose between two
necessary things that I have to fix and
I have no money. And at this point, you
know, we weren't I wouldn't say um you
know, I never lacked a meal, but I
didn't have a lot of sort of extras. And
it changed how I think about money. From
that moment on, I was like, I need to
become independent. And for me,
independence meant I don't need a
paycheck in order to fix the roof or fix
the car. How do you think about money
and independence? I think what you
described is a level of independence but
it's independence is always a spectrum.
So there is a high level of independence
in which you don't need to work anymore
and but I would call that you know
making this up that's like level 13
independence and below that are several
different levels of like even if you
have a $100 in the bank that is that is
a higher level of independence than if
you had zero and certainly if you had
negative if you were in debt. And so you
realize that literally every dollar that
you save is a little claim check on your
future that you control that somebody
else doesn't. I think it's an important
mindset like redefining independence
like that that it's on a spectrum and
every single dollar is an independence
claim check. For me, I've always viewed
it like I've always been a big saver my
whole career and I've always viewed it
as not saving money for delayed
gratification. I viewed it as purchasing
independence for which I get value out
of right now today. there's nothing
delayed about saving this money because
I like waking up tomorrow morning and
being like I I I there there's a big
cushion here and so not if but when
something bad happens in my life
whatever it is whether it's in my
personal life or the macro economy or
you know your pandemics whatever it
might be like there's there there's a
big gap there's a a wide channel that of
outcomes that I can endure and the less
independent the less savings the more
debt you have the narrower that channel
of endurance becomes and so within that
channel is like all the ups and downs of
life, individual and macro. And the
wider the channel is, the more that you
can endure. And so much about compound
interest, not just with money, but with
relationships and careers and
friendships, comes down to what can you
endure? How much how many unknowns and
the depths of those unknowns can you
endure and survive? And so much I wrote
this in psychology money. If you have to
surv like sum up doing well financially
in one word, I think it's survival.
That's true in your career. That's true
for savings. That's true for investing.
Absolutely. It's just survive. It's just
what can you endure? What can you put up
with? And when you view it like that,
you realize that like every dollar that
you save is a claim check of
independence that will serve you not
just in the future but today.
>> Is it Sharp, the founder of Four
Seasons, has this excellent quote which
is excellence is the capacity to take
pain.
>> Yeah.
>> And when we think of that, our minds
just instinctively go to physical pain,
but we don't think of psychological
pain. And we don't think of financial um
ups and downs and being able to just
survive because you can't compound if
you don't survive.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> and then the other thing about
compounding I think people misunderstand
is that all the advantages come at the
end.
>> Yeah.
>> And not at the beginning. They're very
slow at the beginning. But it's that
last double that makes a huge
difference.
>> Yeah. I mean in terms of the dollars
accumulated that's true. So I wrote
about this in psychology money. 99% of
Warren Buffett's net worth was
accumulated after his 65th birthday.
That's just how compounding works. Like
the numbers get nuts at the end. I think
what can be true psychologically though,
it's just like the psychology of
doubling your net worth. You know, I I
think the truth is I felt the richest I
ever have when I had like $1,000 in the
bank when I was in teen. I remember just
being like that's like I can't even
fathom that much because the gap between
you know a year earlier I'd probably
never had more than $20 in my banks and
I have a thousand like what I can't even
fathom that much money and so like
psychologically it's just the gap
between this is true for a lot of things
you get pleasure out of contrast it's
just how much what do you have now and
what are you doing now relative to what
you were doing before and so I write
about in the art of spending money I
know a guy who has a has a private chef
and he's basically getting Michelin star
meals three meals a day and it's easy
for me and you to look at that and being
like that is amazing. What a life. Like
that is nuts. Guarantee you he does not
feel that much from it because he has no
contrast. He He's not eating taco. He's
not eating stale bread for breakfast the
day before. And so when everything is
great, nothing feels great. It's all
what you want is contrast, contrast,
contrast. And so I I think about that a
lot in terms of like it's not
necessarily how much you have, it's just
the contrast to what you have before.
related to that is that people are very
psychologically
uh triggered by downgrades because
you're still contrasting it to what you
used what you used to have. And everyone
has probably heard the studies of like
what would you rather have? Would you
rather have a net worth of a million
dollars when you used to have 2 million
or would you rather have a net worth of
500,000 when you used to have 200,000?
And psychologically most people would
rather have the former.
>> Like the the contrast of being like I
used to have two and now I only have
one. that leaves you feeling much poorer
than if you had 500, but that's your
all-time high. And so I think people is
very sensitive to the psychology of
downgrades. So how do you deal with
that? When you have $1,000, that's your
baseline. This is the most I've ever
had, but now all of a sudden that's my
contrast. That's the point of which
that's the reference point for how I
think about all future bank account
balances. Part of this is like the
reason that there's opportunity in the
economy is because the market, the
world, the free market is going to make
you pay a price to to to get something
good. It's not just going to hand you
wealth for free. You have to do
something for it. And by and large, what
you have to do in capitalism is put up
with a neverending chain of uncertainty
and volatility and things you didn't see
coming. And so, it's never fun to deal
with that. A recession, a job loss, or
you stock market go down 30%. It's never
it's not fun, but that's the cost of
admission for doing it. And I think once
you view it as the cost of admission and
not a punishment for what you're doing,
it doesn't necessarily make it more
palatable, but it it makes it a little
bit more easier to contextualize of
like, yes,
>> the market, you know, goes down 20%.
You're like, "Ah, this hurts. It sucks."
And it does, but you're like, "This is
why I'm going to do well over time is
because I'm willing to put up with and
endure the uh the appetite for pain. The
the the capacity to endure pain is
everything." Now, I think it was Nasin
Talib talks about everyone has their
uncle points where at some point you're
going to cry uncle. At some point,
you're going to say, "It's too much. I
can't I can't handle it anymore."
Everybody has that level somewhere. And
um but I think it's actually difficult
to know where that is looking ahead,
looking forward. I think very few people
know their tolerance for pain
>> looking just trying to be like
prospective about it. I think you have
to experience it in the trenches so to
speak before you actually know how
you're going to feel. I'm I I went
through this with co of like I'm someone
who wrote about the frequency of
volatility, how to think about the
psychology of volatility and co March
2009 a lot of it because it was not just
a stock market crisis. It was not even
an economic crisis. it was a health
emergency and like my kids schools are
shut down and whatnot. Like I and and of
you know billions of other people at
that point I had like sleepless nights
of just waking up to being like man
what's what's going to happen here? And
so it's one thing to say I will be
greedy when others are fearful. It's way
different to actually do it and most
people if you ask them the question how
would you feel psychologically right now
if the stock market fell 50%. In that
exercise, what they do is they imagine a
world where everything is exactly the
same as it is today except stocks are
half the price.
>> And in that context, you're like,
"That's great. It's wonderful."
>> But the reason that there is volatility
is because there is something going on
in the world for which nobody knows
what's going to happen next. That
probably nobody saw coming. That
probably is a legitimate threat to you
and your family's well-being, if not
your your health well-being and whatnot.
And in that context, it's much more
difficult to be like, "Oh, take the long
term and buy." You can do it. The good
people do it. The good investors do it.
But it's much easier said than done.
>> You're in meetings all day. You're
trying to stay present, but you're also
worried you'll forget the decision, the
action item, the important next step.
That's where Granola comes in. Granola
is an AI powered notepad for meetings.
You jot down rough notes like you always
do, and in the background, Granola
transcribes and turns them into clear,
useful notes when the meeting ends.
There are no bots joining your calls, no
distractions, just a clean notepad that
helps you focus. During or after the
call, you can chat with your notes. You
can ask Granola to pull out action
items, help you negotiate, make a
decision, write a follow-up email, and
so much more. I even use it when I'm
listening to podcasts. Once you try it
on a first meeting, it's hard to go
without. Head to granola.ai/shane
and get three months free with the code
shane. That's granola.ai/shane.
I remember talking to one of the world's
uh more successful investors,
a name everybody would recognize uh
around 2012 2013
and the idea of Buffett and how uh we
handled the financial crisis came up and
he said all the you know I'm
paraphrasing here but he's like
basically all the Buffett wannabes sat
on the sideline.
>> Yeah.
>> And they've been waiting for this moment
and they told their investors about it.
They written about it and then all of a
sudden it happened and they were
paralyzed.
>> 10% of them were able to to accomplish
it. But that's why it should be that
way. It should not be the case where
everyone who reads the intelligent
investor can go out and exploit the
exploit the deepest opportunities. Of
course, it's hard. And I use this
analogy a lot of like what percentage of
college athletes make it to the NBA,
let's say. I I don't know the number,
but I bet it's like I bet it's like 1%.
Maybe 3% something like that. And people
are like, "Yeah, it's how it should
work." Yeah,
>> like there's no world in which everyone
who wants to be a pro basketball player
can do it. It's supposed to be the
tippity top of of the of the best. And
it's the same in investing. Like there
should not be a world in which every
ambitious stock picker can beat the
market of of course whenever you hear
the statistics about 95% of mutual funds
underperform their benchmark. I'm like,
yeah, what would you expect? Do you
expect it to be 100%? Like everyone who
tries just prints money? Of course, it's
hard. And so, so a lot of that, but of
course in that situation, everybody
thinks they're part of the 1% who can do
it. But it shouldn't surprise anyone
that very few people can.
>> For most people, one of their largest
purchases is their house. When does it
make sense to purchase a house and when
doesn't it make sense to purchase a
house?
>> It makes sense if it's the right
neighborhood for you and your family,
where you want to live for a long period
of time, and with is within reason of
your household budget. Now, that's a
completely different topic of what
percentage it should be, that's that's a
different thing. But you should not do
it because you have even if you don't
define it like this in your head because
you have some level of FOMO of man,
housing prices have gone up a lot and
like ah that house looks so nice and
things would be and we can't really
afford it or it's going to be a huge
stretch but oh life will be so much
better in there. That's the worst reason
to own a house. Part of this that I have
a lot of empathy for and I think
actually explains a lot of the fertility
crisis in the western world is that most
parents even if they don't actually
vocalize this want to check a couple
boxes before they have a child their
first child. One of the biggest ones is
own a house. And as housing becomes more
unaffordable all over the western world.
It's like this in the UK. It's like this
in Canada. It's like this in Australia.
the more unaffordable it gets, the more
you're going to have good people with
good jobs and solid marriages and
they're 28, 29, nine years old and in
any other era would start building a
start having a family and today they say
no I I you know I I really want the
stability and the feeling of having made
it into adulthood of owning a house
before I do that and in the absence of
that it causes like tremendous problems.
housing, affordable housing, I think, is
the single biggest social problem,
certainly in America, probably in Canada
right now, because so many other social
problems that might seem bigger than
that are downstream of housing. A lot of
the drug problem, the drug crisis is
downstream from unaffordable housing.
The fertility crisis is downstream from
unaffordable housing. The uh the
degradation of politics is downstream
from affordable housing. Because if you
don't feel like you're invested in your
community or you're invested in your
country, it's much easier to be like,
burn the place down. Who cares if
politics is melting down? You're not
invested in it. You're kind of transient
in the system. You can move to another
city. But as a homeowner myself, I know
that like I care deeply about local
politics. I care deeply about the local
parks and the schools. Like I am very
invested in this community, but if
you're not, you don't really care. And
so I think a lot of what's going on in
politics can be tied to unaffordable
housing. Tucker Carlson, who I don't
often agree with, said something I
thought was very profound and true
recently. He said like a good I'm
paraphrasing him, but he said a good
proxy for the health of a country is
whether or not a 28-year-old can
purchase a house. And I was like, that's
great. That's a very good rule of thumb
for how well things are going. And of
course, people know in US and Canada and
UK, like by and large, you can't right
now.
>> Yeah, it's really difficult. It's
something that that needs to be solved
on multiple levels, right? Like teachers
should be able to live in the
neighborhood that they teach in.
Firefighters should be able to live in
the neighborhood they teach in. Somebody
working full-time, I think, you know,
even younger than 28, you know, 24, 25
should be able to support uh a mortgage.
And, you know, I I would love to see
that problem solved. What it what should
be so aggravating about this and why
this should be like a pitchforks and
torches issue is that I don't think it's
an oversimplification
to say the problem is a very easy to
solve and b is literally just a choice.
>> Yeah.
>> That virtually all of the reason that
housing is so unaffordable was because
we don't build enough. And the reason we
don't build enough is zoning. I don't
think that's an oversimplification. We
there is plenty of land. There's plenty
of capital. There's plenty of demand to
get this done. And there are examples of
cities that do build that are very
large, dense cities that have very
affordable housing. Tokyo, gigantic
city, bigger than the city you and I are
in right now in New York, very
affordable housing relatively because
they build they build and build and
build and build.
>> And the fact that we don't, especially
relative to previous generations, if you
went back to the 1950s and60s in
America, you would have seen
construction everywhere.
>> Everywhere you look, there would have
been a new community. And because of
that, we added supply and housing was
relatively affordable. and we don't
anymore. And it's a choice. It's it's
cynical to say that people want the cho
that people want unaffordable housing.
It is a choice to not build as much as
we need.
>> Well, there's a weird incentive because
anybody who owns a home when you think
of affordability, it's like how does
that affect my equity and my if house
prices go down 10% and we're we're
leveraged here, right? So, a 10% draw
down in a house price might wipe out 75%
of my equity. But I think that is flawed
thinking too. I'll tell you why. Let's
say just keep the number simple. You buy
a house for 100,000. Let's say 1
million. Make it more more reason. You
buy a house for a million bucks and the
price doubles. Great. In your mind,
you're like, I just made a million
dollars.
>> Yeah.
>> But no, because if you sell that house
for 2 million, you need to buy another
house to live in. And the next house
you're going to buy, the price also
doubled in the last two years. And so
it's this fandom kind of thing where
it's like the equity that you build
isn't really wealth because you when you
sell that house, you probably have to
buy another one that went up in value
just as much. And unless you are moving
to a cheaper city, which of course that
happens, you're not you're not getting
any benefit out of that. I my my wife
and I have experienced this in in where
we live uh in the last year. The house
that we lived in previously doubled in
four years, which is not like shouldn't
happen, but it did. house doubled. We
lived in and then we sold it about a
year ago, bought a new house and the new
house that we bought was also we bought
it for twice as much as it would have
sold for four years before. So, did we
actually make money on that? Like we we
we could have it it didn't really help
us that much. And if we lived in a world
where home prices never went up, uh you
would of course have a lot of crowing
from homeowners who'd be like, I used to
build equity and now I don't. But the
truth is is that like they're actually
just as well off because the homes that
they could buy if they sold now cost
less as well.
>> I've seen reports at least in Canada
that 30% of the price of a new home is
basically government fees.
>> I believe it.
>> And it's insane, right? When it's
slowing things down. Anyway, we we can
get off this, but um I want to switch to
how exactly do you invest your money?
Walk me through step by step. Well, it's
it's not going to be a long conversation
because it's easy. I dollar cost average
into index funds. I hope to own them for
50 years and that's it. My entire net
worth is a house, cash, Vanguard index
funds, and shares of Marquel where I'm
on the board of directors and that's it.
And I don't I don't think it needs
necessarily to be more complicated than
that. I think it is very intuitive in
finance to be like, I will do the best
if it's if my net worth looks like a
rude Goldberg machine and it's just so
complicated and there's so many levers
and strategies and this and it's not I
don't discount that smart people can do
well financially with complicated
transactions. I just don't think it's
necessary at all. And maybe there's an
analogy to health in this. There are the
well-known biohackers out there who are
just trying they view their body as a
Rube Goldmer machine and they're like I
got to maximize this and do this and
take these pills and this diet whatnot.
I don't think that's necessarily bad,
but without being any any bit of a
health expert at all myself, I'm like,
look, if you just eat a balanced diet
and sleep eight hours and exercise a
couple times a week, that's that's
probably good enough. that's probably
getting you 90 or 95% of the way or
maybe even 100% of the way to the
results that the biohacker is going to
get. I think I think that's by and large
true. And I view finances very similarly
where um my just painfully simple
finances, I bet over the course of a
lifetime, not in any given year, but
over a lifetime, if you compared it to
someone whose finances were very
complicated and had all kinds of
transactions,
>> not only would I be likely to match
those, but probably exceed them. And I
did it with virtually zero effort. And
that's why I do it. I don't recommend
other people do it. It fits my
personality and it allows me to focus on
the variable that I want to, which is
endurance. The simpler it is, the easier
it is. I think the higher the odds that
I'll just I can just stay with it.
Whereas, if it was very complicated, I
might get to a point in the economy or
my career or my cognitive capacity where
like I can't keep it going. And so, I
think the higher the odds that I can
just leave it alone for 50 years, the
higher the odds that you will actually
maximize wealth doing it. I love that
that thinking. Walk me through a $100
comes into your house. How does it get
allocated?
>> I do a lot of mental accounting by which
I mean of like money is fungeible. $1 is
is the same as any other dollar. But I
have a lot of mental accounting where in
my own life, you know, I I sell books, I
speak at conferences, I do some some
other stuff like that. And it's very
much like in my head I'm like, okay, the
book money goes here, the speaking money
goes here, I spend this and that. I have
a lot of like mental accounting that is
not really rational, but it's just how I
how I tend to think about it. And so
I've I've saved all my book money. I've
not I haven't spent a single penny of
the money that I made from books. And
again, I I don't view that as delayed
gratification. It's made me financially
independent and in a way that I gave
value from today. And so that's that's
really helpful. My wife and I, this
would have been true 10 years ago and
it's true today that my wife and I buy
anything we want, but particularly 10
years ago, we didn't want that much.
We've loosened up a little bit now that
we have kids and like, you know, a
little more more experience with life.
But, um, there's there's really no
budget.
>> There's no, but I've been like that
since I was a teenager. I never found it
hard to save money. It was always just
seemed like the the the obvious thing to
do, I guess.
>> Where have you loosened up the most?
>> Probably our house. We have a we have a
cool house we bought a year ago and it's
what's great is that I work from home.
My wife is is at home and so we're there
99% of the that is the core of our life.
Like you might as well enjoy it. And
also what I think is great about the
house is that um by and large other
people don't see it. It's not a car that
I'm showing off around town. It's not
clothes that I want people to notice
when I'm at the airport. It's like this
is just for us. This is internal
benchmark. like I enjoy this and I I
love the feeling of like I'm an early I
wake up 3 hours before my wife and kids
which I really value that in my life too
and I love coming downstairs alone by
myself in the dark and sitting on the
couch with a cup of coffee and just
looking around and being like yeah this
is cool I like this but what's important
is that like no one else sees me do
that. I'm not I'm not trying I'm not
putting on a show for strangers.
>> It's not a status thing.
>> It's not a status thing. It is total
internal benchmark. And so even if we
have, you know, I don't want to say
overinvested in that, but I feel like
that that's the one thing where we're
like, oh, this is worth it for us.
Totally worth it to spend a lot of money
here.
>> I was talking to Barry Diller a few
weeks ago and he mentioned something
about housing that stuck with me and he
said, you know, growing up, I looked at
all these houses and uh he said the
inside is rarely as beautiful as the
outside.
>> Yeah. Because the outside you want
stranger, you want people to drive back
by and be like, "Oh, look at that
person." And I think that's true that,
you know, how many people have have
gardeners, landscapers,
relative to how many people have like
interior designers or whatnot. And I I I
would venture, we're talking first world
problems here, of course, but I would
venture that many more people have
landscapers. Part of which is they don't
want to get dirty, but part of which is
like I think I think whether you know it
or not consciously, you want people,
including strangers, to drive by and be
like, "Oh, that's a nice house. Wonder
who lives there." But the inside of your
house might be a dump at least in
relative terms
>> because the internal stuff like you
can't like you you're you are more
external benchmark focused than others.
I think that that's probably right.
>> One of the other ways to interpret that
and I think the way that I went when I
heard it at first was like oh there's
marital problems, there's problems with
the kids. There's like the the you know
these people who we we grow up going
like I want to live in that house and I
want that life. And if you opened that
door and walked into that life, you
know, it's kids who don't talk to
parents.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I remember this once is a
very specific example. Uh P. Diddy, who
has his own host of of legal issues and
and and moral issues. Of course,
everyone knows him. As part of his
criminal process a couple years ago, the
police released pictures of the inside
of his house. I think it was his house
in LA. It may have been Miami, though.
And um this is P Diddy's house. On the
outside, it is a freaking mansion as you
would expect. The inside of the house
where the pictures were released, these
crime scene photos, place is a dump.
Place is a dump.
>> Oh gosh.
>> And that was so interesting. I was like
I think from the outside, particularly a
celebrity like that is like the people
who drive by are going to see a mansion.
But inside when it's just me and the
kids and just like who cares? It's a
dump. And I was I I thought that was
very interesting. If we divide life into
four major eras, the 20s, 30s, 40s, and
50s,
how should people think about acquiring
and spending money in those eras? I
think it's so different for everybody
because a lot of people find their way
when they're 14 and other people find it
when they're 40, if ever. So I I I
hesitate to give like a formula for it,
but I I think it tends to broadly be
true in a gray way, not in a black and
white way that like probably age birth
to 20, you're forming an identity.
You're just trying to figure out who you
are and you're trying to make sense of
how you're wired and whatnot. You're
just figuring out your identity. 20 to
30, I think by and large, you are
learning a skill. Hopefully that that
again, this is gray. This is this is
this is a shade of gray here. You're
learning a skill. In your 30s, you can
put that skill to work. And in your 40s
and 50s, hopefully, you can really
exploit that skill and and make some
money doing it. I think as a very broad
broad stroke formula for life, that can
be great. Now, I I I can think of a
million examples of people who did not
follow that path and ended up great and
ended up happy. And so, that's not But I
think in general, that tends to be true.
I think it's it's hard to meet someone
who is very successful, didn't have
something like that. Once in a while
you'll see find someone who again found
their way when they were a teenager and
were making a fortune when they were 23
and could basically retire at 28. Like
those people exist, but I think it's
it's very difficult to know who you are
before you are, you know, I hesitate to
say 25, 30, 35. Someone was asking me
about this the other day about what do I
think of Gen Z because there is so much
written about Gen Z as uh a drift and
weward and lacks the work ethic and
whatnot. th those articles and
commentaries exist everywhere. And it
reminded me, I was like, it it seems
like it was yesterday that our gener my
generation, the millennials, everyone
was saying that about us 15 years ago.
The millennials are a drift. They don't
have the work ethic. They don't have the
values that the baby boomers and they
did before them. And if you go back to
the 1970s, they said the exact same
thing about the baby boomers. They're a
drift. They don't have the work ethic.
They don't have the values. Go back to
the 30s and they said the exact same
about what we now know as the greatest
generation. They don't have the morals.
They don't have the work ethic. They're
a drift. I think the truth is, no matter
the generation, no generation handles
their 20s with a lot of grace and
dignity. It's a very difficult period
because you're still trying to figure
out who you are. You are technically an
adult. You are technically on your own
and kind of, you know, out of the cradle
and trying to figure yourself out, but
very few people do. And I think that's
true at a generational level, which is
why it is so easy and almost inevitable
that the older generation criticizes
whoever the current crop of 20-year-olds
are.
>> I remember in my 20s how I thought about
things financially. Uh I was married at
the time and we lived off one salary.
>> Yeah. And that was our way of like
because you go from making no money and
you know like scrging in the garbage
basically for food at the student union
building um to sort of like oh you're
getting a paycheck every two weeks this
is insane you know
>> and so we were like oh we'll just live
off one paycheck and we'll save the
other paycheck and then the thinking was
if we do our 20s right it just sets up
the next 50 years and by doing it right
we were totally different than all of
our friends.
>> Um, so they were getting houses and
pools and we're like, we're in a
one-bedroom condo,
>> you know, barely scraping by on one
salary. We're not going on vacation.
We're not doing all these other, but we
never felt like we were missing things
with all these other people because,
>> you know, in our heads we just were
like, "Oh, they're living paycheck to
paycheck." And we don't have nearly as
as nice of a life as they do. But like
if we can maintain this for a decade
then all of a sudden our 30s become a
little bit easier. Our 40s become easier
and then as you you sort of age you
start thinking about money differently
right in your
>> 40s and 50s you're like oh I need to
retire like how do I take care of my
parents financially and you know how do
I pay off the house? How do I take care
of my parents? How do I how do you see
those milestones like affecting people?
I told the story once before, but I
hadn't really thought about it very
much. Is I I uh I grew up with a guy. I
worked with a guy. I was probably uh 18
or 19 and he was probably uh 28, let's
say. So, he's a little bit older than
me. And I worked with him at at a ski
resort. And uh we we worked in the in
the ski rental shop together. His name
was Kipgar. Really cool guy. And Kip at
the time I knew when we worked together,
he had $25,000 in credit card debt from
ski trips that he had taken. He skied in
Europe and he skied all South America
and whatnot. And at the time I was like
25 grand in credit card debt. You are a
maniac.
>> You're not a maniac. You're an idiot.
And I gave him so much grief about it.
And I just thought I it was almost on
like a daily basis. I'm like you are
insane. I can't fathom it. And the very
sad punchline here is Kip died in a ski
accident when he was 30, 32, something
like that. And it was amazing the speed
at which in my head I was like, I'm so
glad you took those trips, man. I'm so
glad you lived the life you did before
you tragically left us so young. And I
thought about that a lot. And like no
one should live their life thinking
they're they're going to die at 32 or
whatever it might be. It's not an
appropriate way to live. But I I I think
of a lot about like the question you
should ask is if you were on your
deathbed
>> or facing down the barrel of death, this
is a terrible thing to talk about, but
it's it's a fine thing to talk about.
What would you regret? What what would
you look back on? Kip died in a ski
accident. It was like a mountaineering
accident. He was he was hiking up the
trail. He's hit by a massive avalanche.
And I uh I I I wonder in that moment if
he had a couple seconds of realizing he
was about to die and his life flashes
before his eyes. And I imagine just
knowing him, the life he lived, if his
life flashed before his eyes, he was
probably like, "Fuck yeah, I did it."
Like, "I did some cool things." And so
like, so what are you gonna regret? And
I I've been a big saver my whole life,
my whole adult life.
>> And if I were in that situation
tomorrow, heaven forbid, I would not
have the regrets for the trips I didn't
take
>> and whatnot because I would take so much
pleasure knowing that because I saved my
wife and kids are going to be okay.
Nothing would matter more than me than
that. And I would massively regret it if
I was staring down that barrel, so to
speak, knowing that not only am I gone,
but my wife and kids are are in in
trouble now because because I'm that
would that would leave me just
overwhelmed with regrets. So, it is
never as simple as being like live for
today or save for tomorrow. It's always
just what are you likely to regret at
some point in the future. It could be a
year from now. It can be on your
deathbed 70 years from now. Whatever it
is, always thinking about your capacity
for regret, what you are likely to
regret. and my regret's probably
different than yours, very different
from mine was from Kips. And so it's I
think that's that's how I think about
it. You have to think constantly about
what you're likely to regret in the
future. What advice would you give to
your younger self about spending money?
>> Someone asked me about this recently and
I thought it was interesting. Let's go
back to when I was 19 and I think we
were all, you know, at that age. Uh I
was a saver, but at 19 it meant like
saving a hundred bucks was like a feat.
That was a hero. a hundred bucks or if I
saved a thousand bucks like wow that was
that's crazy and let's say I I don't
know what the numbers are but let's say
I because I invested that that $100 is
now worth 500 it's probably something
like that with what the market's done
$500 today does not mean that that much
to me it's not that big a deal so was it
worth it or if I had a time machine
should 19year-old Morgan have taken his
friends out to dinner with that $100
versus invested it into a amount of
money that means nothing to me today and
my response was I don't think that's the
right way to think about Because I think
it's impossible to have a yolo
paycheck-to paycheck mentality young in
your young years and then assume that
you're going to flip a switch when
you're 35 and become a saver. And so I
think the reason that I've had good
financial habits in my mind at least um
through today is because I started them
at 19. Like it's not that that the $100
turned into 500. It's that the habits I
formed in that era brought me through
today. And I could not have changed the
habits when I turned 35. It just doesn't
work like that. And so I that's what
part of why I don't have a lot of regret
for saving money that was a huge amount
to me back then that has grown to an
completely insignificant amount to me
today. It it was the habits that I
formed back then that that made all the
difference.
>> I think you're paying for dinner next
time.
>> I'll do it. It's okay. I think you paid
last time, so I probably owe you.
>> Um, you're highly affluent. And how do
you think about raising kids with money
in terms of what are the like what do
you do? What do you try to avoid?
I had this conversation with someone
last week and um he has first generation
immigrant parents. His parents moved
here from America, moved to America and
worked their tails off to support their
children, including this this guy. and
now he has a daughter and he
said,"Morgan, I worry that she's spoiled
certainly relative to the life that he
had when he was a kid. You know, she has
this and she has that and she can buy
these toys and whatnot and she's
spoiled." And he said, "What do I what
do I do about that?" And I said, "I bet
you if we were talking to your parents
right now, they would say that was the
goal. The goal, the reason that they
moved to America and work their tails
off is so that their grandchild would
look spoiled by comparison." And so
there's part of me when I completely
understand and I feel it as well, the
urge to not spoil my kids. I want them
to be hardworking, independent,
understand the value of a dollar. Of
course, I want that. You want that. We
all do. I think there's also something
to be said that the goal, the purpose of
all of this is that so myself in the
future and my kids and my grandkids and
my grandkids
will live in a world that by today's
standards appear spoiled. That's the
goal, isn't it? Like wouldn't it be a
failure if our great grandkids lived the
exact same life that we do today and
have to work just as hard and work the
same hours? That sucks. And that's
always that's always been true. If you
look at a middle class ordinary American
today, not not someone who's super
affluent, middle class American by the
standards of 1900, let's say, they are
spoiled rotten. They are absolutely
spoiled rotten. And if the person in the
1900s had a time machine to come today,
they wouldn't stop laughing at how
spoiled this person was and how trivial
their problems were. And but again, like
that's the point. The point is that we
have innovation and technology over time
so that life becomes a little bit
easier. It's always the case that to the
previous generation that had it harder,
it looks the the the phrase you use is
spoiled. But I think what's actually
happening is progress. And so but now I
I understand that you want your kids to
be grateful. You want them to be hard,
you know, hardworking and whatnot. But
compare how people react when they get
the flu today to how to the standards of
150 years ago where it's like you had
eight kids and seven of them died of
infectious disease before their fifth
birthday or whatever it was. Like oh
boohoo, you got the flu, you got a
headache for a day, but that's not how
we think about it. It it hurts. It's so
it's always the case that the progress
of a generation appears spoiled to one
even if it's true progress that we have.
Now, I want my kids, I think, as a broad
formula. I want to use the money that I
have to protect within limitations, my
children's downsides. I don't ever want
them to just collapse on their face and
they can't work their way out in life. I
want to be there to as a somewhat of a
safety net, but I don't want to be a
fuel. I don't just want to give them
money and be like, "Oh, lucky you. You
have your parents made a little bit of
money. We're just going to give it to
you now." I think that's by and large
not the right way to do it. And I think
that's like I think inadvertently my
parents did this of it was unspoken. But
I think I intuitively knew when I was 18
that if I fell on my face they would be
there to catch me even if it was
unspoken. But I also knew clear as day
that they were not just going to write
me a check. Like that was completely out
of the question. But because of that I
think I was able to enter adulthood with
a little bit more confidence knowing
that like hey I'm going to take a risk
and move to this new city and do this
this new thing but like if it doesn't
work out I'm I'm I'm not going to be
homeless. That was that was that was a
good way to do it. And so teaching your
kids to be self-sufficient. Even if
their lifestyle appears spoiled by
today's standards, they become
self-sufficient. They can keep it going
on their own.
>> Is their lifestyle today, is that the
contrast point? So like whatever life
they're living with you in the home
growing up, that becomes their reference
point.
>> Right. Exactly. I, you know, my wife and
I had this experience like a year or two
ago where we were thinking about buying
a new car. One of which, one of the
options that we could buy was a pretty
nice car. And I had this thing of like,
let's say that our two kids 20 years
from now want to be kindergarten
teachers. And because of that, the car
that they might be able to afford is a
is a Honda Civic or whatever, you know,
a much more modest car. Have I ruined
their adulthood to some degree? Because
I set their expectations that in
childhood, mom and dad drove this, but
now as when I'm an adult, we got to
drive this. And I think there's just
such an inherent natural thing of like
parents I I I I want to raise kids who
are going to do better than than we did.
Not just financially, but in many
aspects of life. And I think the
children want to have a generational
growth pattern as well. They want to
look back and be like, man, I grew up
here, but now as an adult, I'm here.
Like amazing. Feels great to surpass
your parents.
>> This is the first generation where they
think that might not be the case.
>> I think they're probably wrong about
that in general. Of course, there's
going to be lots of examples where that
was the case, but I think they tend to I
think I I I I would bet that they would
be wrong about that. Now, I think it is
true that even if statistically and
analytically my kids will be living a
better life than than we are,
particularly for things like medicine,
um I think by comparison, they won't
they they won't appreciate it in greater
degrees than we didn't appreciate our
progress because of social media.
>> Yeah. because they have only known an
era when in which not just there are
some but there are literally tens of
hundreds of millions of people on
Instagram who appear to be richer,
happier, smarter, more successful than
they are. You can so imagine a world in
which even if you are living like a
Saudi prince 50 years from now, someone
online is doing it better and so you're
sitting there in your gold palace so to
speak um feeling feeling down about
yourself. And so you you can easily
imagine a world in which ex the the
growth rate of expectations just becomes
exponential because of social media.
>> It's yeah there's so many negative
byproducts to that. I mean I think you
know it used to be our reference point
was our street.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh our little community and maybe Joe
got a new car or you
>> new bike or something. Yeah. Jane got a
swimming pool kind of thing and now you
pop open Instagram and
>> Joe's got a golf stream and and and
Jane's got a Bugatti kind of thing. Or
Jane has a beautiful smiling family of
cute kids in their photo session without
seeing the screams and the tantrums that
took place before it kind of thing. It's
just everyone has a very inflated sense
of other people. And I do this too. I
post cute pictures of my kids online. I
don't p I don't post tantrums. I don't
post fights. Uh and so so it's like
everyone is putting on an act so to
speak in an innocent way but in a very
real way.
>> Yeah. You're camouflaging different
parts of your life.
>> Absolutely. Like once in a while some
people I have I I do follow a couple
people who are like I think they want to
post their warts so to speak. They they
want to post the downside. It's very
refreshing. People love like the the
saying misery loves company.
>> People love hearing that you're not the
only one suffering that other people are
going through the fights, the stresses,
the anxieties, the doubts that you are
as well. Like it's a very comforting
thing to hear.
>> Yeah. I mean, we talked earlier about
the Steven Bartlett interview I did that
we didn't air because it was so bad and
it was my my failure
>> uh and not Steve's. And I posted that
publicly.
>> Yeah. Brave of you.
>> And I remember just being petrified. But
I was like, people only see success.
Like so much of what people see is like,
oh, the book's doing well. The podcast
is doing well. The newsletter's doing
well. like, "Oh, Shane must be man." I
remember like that was a hard few days
for me after that.
>> I remember when you posted that. I
remember being like, "Good for you,
man." Like the response that I had as an
outsider watching that was not like,
"Oh, look at Shane, this clown. He's
stumbled on stage." That's that was the
the opposite. The response I had is
like, "Man, good for you." Because I've
had a lot of failures and good to know
that I'm not alone in that. of of all
the I wrote four 4,000 blog posts over
my career and the one that meant the
most to me by far was a post I wrote in
2017. It's called Overcoming Your Demons
where I wrote about I grew up with a
very severe stutter. I really struggled
to speak until my honestly early 30s.
Really had a hard time. Um and if you go
back to my childhood, I could I I could
barely speak. It was it was very
difficult for me to get a sentence out.
It was severe stutter. and and I wrote
about that process and in part how I how
I overcame it and whatnot. And I was
really hesitant to post it a because I
it felt like a a look at me post
>> and it felt like even though this wasn't
the intention, it felt like a fishing
for sympathy post. But I think one of
the points that I made in the post was
like everyone's got their demons
>> and you usually don't know about it.
>> Actually, a lot of people stutter, but
you usually don't know about it because
most stutterers just don't speak that
much. So, I guarantee you, you have a
friend or a co-orker who you think is
just quiet and and they're not quiet.
They just don't want to speak because
they struggle to speak. And so, that's
an example of like a lot of people have
demons that you just don't know about.
And everyone has their own version of
that. And people love it when you expose
your own because they it makes them feel
less alone.
>> Well, that's what happened. I got that.
I've rarely been texted or uh contacted
so much about post that I was about
that. And it it wasn't sort of like I
was worried people would think I'm
fishing for sympathy or uh but it was
more like oh my god this thing happened
to me last week too. I totally bombed
this
>> and then all of a sudden people didn't
feel alone.
>> I mean one of the most common feelings
is everyone else is crushing is crushing
it in life
>> and I'm struggling
>> because all you can see is their
outside. You can see basically the act
that they want you to see but you are
extremely a you're you are aware of
nothing more than the thoughts that are
running through your head. the doubts,
the anxieties, the worries, the the
things that didn't get exposed. I think
if you could see inside of everyone's
head and see their thoughts, um you
would see that people are a hundred
times more anxious than you assumed.
They're a hundred times funnier than you
assumed. They're a hund times more
doubtful and depressed than you assumed.
Like I think in either direction,
positive and negative, you would realize
that the range of emotions is a hundred
times greater than you think. Because
most of the time what people are showing
you is what they want you to see. It's
the performance.
>> How do you think about inheritance?
>> I like the idea not first proposed but I
think clarified in recent times by Bill
Perkins who wrote the book Die with Zero
who was like if you're if you are going
to give your kids money and I know this
might a little bit contradict what we
just previously talked about. If you are
going to give your kids money, give it
to them when they need it, which is
probably their 30s and 40s when they're
starting to build a family of their own.
The idea of I'm gonna wait, I'm gonna
make you wait until I die, at which time
you might be 70 and then you can have
all of it. Uh is is a is a weird
philosophy. It's the most common
philosophy, but it's kind of a weird
philosophy where and I I will
acknowledge again that this can and I I
I still don't know what my wife and I
are going to do with our kids, but if
you can help them buy a house when
they're 30, that is going to give them a
much greater boost in life than if they
get a million dollars when they're 75
after you die. And so I think that's
that's that's a lot of it. There's a
Charlie Mer quote where one of his very
wealthy friends comes and says,
"Charlie, if I leave all of my money to
my kids, is that going to ruin their
ambition?" And Charlie says, "Yes, of
course it will, but you have to do it
anyways." And the friend says, "Why? Why
do I have to do it?" Charlie says,
"Because if you don't, they will hate
you." And I think there's there's some
truth to that. Not just for the
billionaire families, but I think
there's there's some truth to that, too.
That I think there can be a lot of
animosity, and I understand the
animosity of a 40-year-old working their
butt off and struggling living paycheck
to paycheck while their parents are,
just to make up an example, you know,
retired in Florida playing golf every
day. I understand why that creates a
little bit of of ill feelings and the
parents basically being like, "Oh, well,
well, one day this is going to be
yours." And the kid being like, "I I
don't like I I would appreciate if that
day were now." It's a very complicated
topic. There's I don't think there's any
formula for doing it, right? But that's
I I I and I think in general, I like
that philosophy.
>> What can people learn from the
Vanderbilts?
So, the Vanderbilts, of all the Robert
Baron families who lived not far from
where you and I are recording right now,
I think the the Carnegies and the
Rockefellers did a very good job at
using their wealth to both give
themselves a good life and to benefit
society. Not perfect, but they did a
pretty good job given the sums of money
that they had. Uh, and the Rock the the
Rockefellers still have a lot of wealth
today, have billions of wealth today.
And every library, every every city in
America has a Carnegie library and
Carnegie Hall. And well, not like that
still exists. The Vanderbilts, I think,
did the worst by far. And um it is hard
to imagine other another family who had
so much money, who had the equivalent of
hundreds of billions of dollars, who
squandered it, I think is the right
word, so quickly. And part of it I I do
have some empathy for them because they
I don't think they meant to do this. I
think I think when Cornelius Vanderbilt
died in the 1800s, he wanted no one else
in his family to have to suffer ever
again. He just said, "You're gonna have
tons of money and you could just live
like an absolute king for the rest of
your days for generation after
generation after generation." And what I
think it inadvertently did, even though
some people foresaw this when it first
happened, was it created a family who
valued nothing but money and the money
was their dictator. The money told them
who they could be. It told them where
they could live. It told them what their
personality could be. It told them what
they could value, told them who they can
marry, told them who they can socialize
with, a lot of which was not who they
actually were. And so you had these
people who were in who would inherit the
equivalent of $10 billion when they were
18, um, who were basically puppets in
their own life. They were like character
actors in their own life because they
wanted to be somebody completely
different. Maybe they wanted to like
live on a farm and have a very like
humble life. And the family structure
said, "No, you're going to live on Fifth
Avenue in a 50,000 square foot house and
host balls and uh and and and live on
your yacht and show off to other people.
That's what you have to be. You are a
Vanderbilt. You have to be that." And
the vast majority of them, I think, were
miserable for it. And it wasn't until
the money was mostly exhausted that uh a
lot of them were that the the subsequent
errors were like mercilessly let go like
with a sense of like they were lucky to
be let go and be able to be themselves.
And this is now well known, but one of
the first Vanderbilt heirs to get to do
that was Anderson Cooper of CNN, the
journalist, who was uh, you know, I
think one of the first people in his
family, which is a little bit of an
exaggeration, but one of the first
people in his family to get to have the
privilege to be himself and live his own
life and not have to live up to the
title of Vanderbilt heir, even if it
didn't fit his personality at all.
>> He wrote a book on that, didn't he? He
wrote a book about the history of of of
the Vanderbilts and how it it fit in
with other kind of Robert Baron families
uh in in his day. Um and it's it's not
all negative like and and I don't if you
read the biographies of the of the
Vanderbilts, it's not it's not all
negative, but there it is not anywhere
near the happiness that you would assume
for people who would uh inherit $10
billion on their 18th birthday. It's
it's nowhere near that. And so, look, I
want to be I I I I want to have a higher
net worth. I I want to be wealthy. But
you don't see it what money can't do for
you until you look at the magnifying
glass of like unbelievably wealthy
people and what it does for them and
what it can't do for them.
>> How does wealth affect your relationship
with your spouse?
>> Oh, I think not at all. I don't I mean I
I it's a great question because I don't
think I've thought about that
whatsoever. But you know when my my wife
and I met when we were young, we were 19
20 years old when we met and had had
nothing and and no money. We're college
students and of course nothing. And are
we happier today? We have a different
sense of life because now we've been
together for 20 years and we uh we have
two two lovely kids together and
whatnot. So there's a very different
view on life and a sense of
accomplishment for that. But are we
happier? And I think that's no. But
that's not uncommon. Not everybody, but
a lot of people if you ask them when was
the happiest time in your life when you
had the most laughs, the greatest times,
a lot of people, not everybody will tell
you high school, college.
>> High school, college. this is a man
hanging out with my buddies and parties
and we did this crazy thing and we did
that crazy thing and one of the common
denominators of that era of that age is
you have no money you don't but you're
still very capable of having a great
time with your friends and laughing and
going out and going to parties and going
on road trips whatever it might be and
so the things that make my wife and I
happy we like walking our dog and we
like that 10 years ago as much as we do
today and even before we had a dog we
like going for walks and and doing this
we like we like laughing and talking
about things and whatnot. It's things
that don't cost any money whatsoever.
And I think that is a perfect example of
the list of things that money cannot do
for you. And so if I look at my own life
relative to who I was 10 years ago, does
my wife love me more? No. Do my kids
love me more? No. Like that's that's now
the psychology of downgrades can play
back in here because what would happen
if my career imploded and it was my
fault? Would my wife might love me less?
Like maybe because the psychology of
downgrades and taking care of your
family that that plays a role in there.
Would would would my kids think less of
me if we had to fire our house and move
into a roach filled apartment? Like
maybe. So there is some element
particularly on the way down but
definitely on the way up. It uh it's the
the psychology of it is not necessarily
what you think. What my wife values and
of course this is not unique to me is
that I'm I'm a good husband. I I pay
attention. I listen. I'm helpful. I'm
grateful. like not how how big is our
house or how fast is our car.
>> Yeah, that's a good place to be. What
can you learn about someone from how
they spend their money?
>> I think is it is a very insightful
window into people. Now, is money
everything in the world? Of course not.
Is it the most important thing in your
life? Absolutely not. But it is a very
clear window into how people think about
social aspiration, self-confidence,
doubt, a lot of other things. I I I I I
could list half a dozen things that are
obviously more important than money.
Health, uh, humor, uh, you know, uh,
your relationships with people,
obviously more important. But when you
look at how someone spends money, you're
like, "Oh, I can tell a lot about you.
If I saw your bank account and your
credit card statement, uh, I I I could I
could learn a lot about you. I could
probably learn as much about you from
that as I would if I spent a couple days
just just getting to know you. And so I
I think I think that's true. Even just
looking at how people dress, I think is
is very interesting. I always make this
point of like and this is true as a as a
shade of gray. There are exceptions to
this, but when I see like a middle-aged
man driving a yellow Ferrari, I'm like
look, I don't judge, but I'm like
there's a story there. Yeah.
>> And I bet most of the time, not all the
time, but the story is that person was
snubbed or doubted or doubted themselves
at some previous point in their life.
And the yellow Ferrari is a trophy to
show to others and to show yourself of
like I made it. I overcame. That's what
it was. And that's why I think in
general too, the yellow sports car, so
to speak, tends to be a new fun a new
money phenomenon. Not a lot of old money
families with those or fewer of them
because I think the new money wealth
like feels vindicated over what they
overcame. I used to be poor and I'm not
anymore and I want people to know it and
I want to show myself. It's a it's a
trophy to myself. Whereas the old money
family is is is is probably closer to be
like look we we've always had this. It's
like we we don't have to overcome
anything.
>> It's the expectation.
>> It's the it's the expectation of it.
Yeah. I look at the the people who do
that and you know to use the yellow
Ferrari example and I'm like that person
has a chip on their shoulder and and
also wink like I relate to that
>> and I don't think that's a bad thing.
It's not a criticism.
>> I have a family member I wrote about
this in the art of spending money who
grew up extremely poor, homeless foster
system kind of poor and they became a
very successful businessman and he told
his daughter when his daughter was
getting ready for college he said please
pick the most expensive school that you
can get into. Please, I'm begging you.
And it was almost like the more
expensive the better. As in like as like
>> he would feel better.
>> He felt so good about what he overcame.
>> The idea that he could say, I used to be
homeless and now I'm sending my daughter
to a school that cost 70 grand a year or
whatever it was, that was a trophy for
him internally. It wasn't even signaling
to others. It was I think he went to bed
that night being like, I did it. I did
it, man. And so that whole idea that
like a lot of spending is not utility.
It's not even rational. A lot of times
it's filling a psychological hole that
you have from some point in your life.
>> We have a mutual friend Brent Bashure
and he has the concept that has stuck
with me ever since and I I use it so
often now between clean fuel and dirty
fuel and sort of what motivates you. And
you know he argues that clean fuel is a
better source. And I I counter this with
like dirty fuel just it never goes out
like you don't use it up. It just
>> you keep going with it. And that drives
in part society and it it might drive
that person to buy the yellow Ferrari or
send their kid to the most expensive
school. But
>> they did that by creating some sort of
economic value in life to get rewarded
for that and that's their their status
thing whatever keep going
>> whatever it might be. I think I've I've
become much less cynical and judgmental
about whatever your thing might be. So
again when I see the elephar I don't
judge you but I know there's a story and
now I have a story. I have my own
insecurities and and faults and flaws
and when everybody does and you express
them in a different way and maybe it's
the case I mentioned earlier I've always
been a big saver. Not even maybe. I
would say almost certainly, but part of
that came from earlier periods in my
life when I had uh lower self-esteem,
very low confidence in my ability to
earn a lot of money, and that has led me
to saving money with the idea that like,
oh, this is all going to come crashing
down soon, and I need to prepare for
that personal uh, you know, downfall. I
think if you got me on the therapist's
couch, you would you would pull
something like that out of me. And so
everybody has their own little version
of this in some degree uh in their own
unique ways that influences how we think
about and spend money.
>> Is spending for status ever useful?
>> I think it can be. I'm wearing a you
know I'm dressed like this. I I I I
don't dress like this on Saturday at my
house, but I want to fit in and be
appropriate for you and your audience.
So is that signaling, you know, if I was
if nobody was watching, I would not wear
a collared shirt like I am right now.
I'd be wearing a t-shirt and some dirty
shorts or something, right? So and so am
I Come on. It's a clean shirt. At least
it's a nice looking shirt. And but so is
this is this is this signaling like
yeah, probably. But I think but it's
perfectly fine because I'm not signaling
to show off. I'm signaling to fit in and
be accepted which is a little bit
different. And so there's always a
degree of of fitting in whether that is,
you know, manners and being polite to
other people. Is it that you actually,
you know, you when you say thankful, you
know, you know, thank you to people,
someone who does something nice for you,
waiter comes in and fills up your water
glass, you say thank you. Is it because
you are are truly grateful for it which
might be the case or is it just like
that's the appropriate thing to do. It's
just proper manners to do that. Is that
signaling like probably and so to answer
your question yes there is absolutely
time when signaling is important. I
think it becomes dangerous when the
purpose of your signaling is I want to
get the attention of strangers who are
not in this with me who are not part of
the group that I'm trying to gain the
respect and admiration of. I'm trying to
gain the attention and admiration of
other people who I don't know who are
probably not even watching to begin
with. I think that's a lot of it. I
think you you see this very often with
people who have very poor manners, who
are very gruff and say whatever's on
their mind that in their mind they're
like, I don't care what you think about
me. I don't care. But the truth is like
they probably don't get accepted into
groups and societies and and like friend
circles and clicks and whatnot that
would really benefit them. And so that's
I think that there's a there there's
there's a joke where it's like just be
yourself is good advice for like 5% of
people. And I I love that that joke that
meme of like most people should not be
themselves. They should meter what they
say and how they behave around other
people in a signaling way in order to
fit in.
>> That's a really good point. I want to
come back to something we talked about
earlier which is excellence is the
capacity to take pain. And I want to
know what you've learned about
psychology from studying the history of
panics, depressions, crashes, and what
advice you could give people who might
be going through that. Whether it's uh
you know, they're listening to this 5
years from now and we're in a market
downturn or um their life just feels
like it's not
it's not working the way it should at
the moment. I think there's two things
when we talk about like broad economic
crashes and depressions. On one hand, I
could say the economy is cyclical and
that's the greatest sense of
opportunity. 1932 the stock market had
fallen 89% but it was about to go
absolutely parabolic rocket ship up. And
so you can talk about that be greedy
when others are fearful. But I think
there's some survivorship bias in there
because the German economy also
collapsed in the 1920s and 30s. And did
they get a rebound out of it? No, they
got Hitler out of it is what happened.
And you could list a dozen examples of
that and individual examples of when
people whose career fell, their
portfolio fell and was that uh an
opportunity for them to grow for a lot
of people. No, it was it was it was the
end. It was there was collapse. So I
think avoiding the idea of the economy
and your individual life is is volatile,
but you always want to avoid
catastrophic collapse. You you never
want to get to a point where you can't
actually recover from it. And it's very
difficult to know where that point would
be. I think there are of all of the
possible outcomes of the United States
during the Great Depression in the
1930s, we got probably
the outcome that we that actually
happened was like a top 10% outcome. It
easily could have if not should have
turned out as it did in much of Europe
where after the Great Depression the
people's response was like maybe we
should give fascism a try. Maybe maybe
this thing didn't work. maybe should we
give that was probably the most probable
outcome and so the fact that it didn't
happen doesn't mean we should think it's
always going to happen like that like
that it's true for individual lives as
well I think that's part of the
psychology of collapse is like it's too
easy to look back at what happened for
companies and whatnot everyone knows or
it is now well known the story of Apple
absolutely Apple computer absolutely
struggled in the 1990s nearly went
bankrupt in the late 90s early 2000s and
then had this unbelievable revival Steve
Jobs created the iPad and the iPhone and
the and the and the and the and the and
then then the rest is history from
there. But for every one of those
stories, you can tell 50 stories about
companies that just lost and went
bankrupt.
>> And so it's too easy to think about the
psychology of pulling yourself up from
the pits of despair because it's it's I
I think those are the rarities from
that. And I think this is why financial
and psychological independence become so
vital. And it's also the case that I
think as a survival mechanism, we
underestimate the odds of bad things
happening to us because if we were if we
were honest about the odds of it
happening, it'd be too hard to get out
of bed in the morning. If we were honest
about the odds of of you getting
divorced, of you losing your job, of
your kids not turning out the way that
you thought they would, of you not
saving for retirement. If you were
honest about those odds, it'd be hard to
wake up tomorrow. You'd wake you'd be
overwhelmed. And so I think we there is
a a pro there is a almost healthy amount
of ignorance that we have of of being
like yeah but that's not going to happen
to me. It's almost in a good way that
you do it. It's like a survival
mechanism. But because we do it I think
it is a very important to financially
and psychologically have a level of
independence. So just focusing on the
financial independence a level of
savings that seems like it's too much
that seems like oh this is completely
excessive. Do I need this much savings
and liquidity? The answer might be yes
because you're probably underestimating
the odds of very bad things happening in
your life.
>> What percentage of your net worth is in
cash?
>> It's probably 20 to 30%.
Maybe it's high teens. Right in that in
that zone
and it's been like that over the over
the course of of of big changes in my
net worth. I've always added about like
that. Now, any financial adviser would
look at that and say, Morgan, given your
age and income, that's way too much. You
don't need that. And I I don't even
disagree with that. I mean, it is it is
a it is ridiculous. But I value sleeping
at night. And as I said before, maybe
there's a nugget of my past that's left
me with a lower sense of self-confidence
of being able to, you know, of the idea
that this is all going to come crashing
down. And the idea that what I value
more than anything is not outperforming
the market or outperforming my peers.
It's independence. And so there are
quirks of my personality and my wife's
personality that lead me to that. Never
in a million years would I recommend
that to everyone or even many people.
And I think it's I think it is unique to
my personality. But that's the point.
How you allocate your money is unique to
your p your personality. And I hope you
don't judge me and I wouldn't judge you
if you do it very differently. I think
that's I think that's the most important
part. It's less about what do I do and
more the idea that I do it because I'm
me and I'm not you. I always read these
articles about how rich people are
spending their money and then people in
the comments are like in uproar and I'm
you know I
>> like you would do it differently.
>> Yeah. I was like my personal belief is
like if you earn that money legitimately
and you create a value for society you
should be able to spend it however you
want. Like
>> Mark Zuckerberg is a very interesting
case study here because at least from
the appearance I don't know him so maybe
this is just a fake outward appearance.
>> Up until like five years ago he was the
frugalest billionaire you can imagine. M
you think he had a jet for private
security reasons but like lived in a
modest house drove an Acura like well at
least gave the appearance of living and
in the last five five years I think he's
been like screw it we ball let's go
bought a yacht bought has like a $10
million watch collection bought like
everything which he deserves. He's one
of the richest men of all time. But it's
interesting if it is true that there was
like a oh I used to be frugal but now
I'm doing this. And I don't I again I I
really don't judge that either. Maybe he
found like he was maybe he was happy and
content living a modest lifestyle, but
then he was like, "Man, I love watches.
I love the artistic value. I love the
engineering of value of them." So even
when people go through big changes, I
think it's like great. If that works for
you, that's wonderful. And we can
contrast that against Buffett, who we
talk a lot about, who obviously does not
have $10 million watches and a yacht,
famously lives in the house he bought
when he was like 26 or whatever. And I
think that works for him. Totally works.
Totally fits his personality. Everyone's
going to be a little bit different here.
For a lot of people, their goal is
passive income in order to fund their
expenses. Talk to me about what that is
and if that's a good goal or not on the
spectrum of sort of financial
independence. Where where is that? It's
a very appealing word because the idea
is I get paid to do nothing. But the
vast majority of what people consider
passive income, they're working their
butts off for. Particularly real estate
if you're a landlord. And people are
like, "Oh, it's passive income." No,
it's not. your toilet breaks, the roof
leaks, the tenant doesn't pay, they put
a hole in the wall. Like, anyone who's
been a landlord knows that it could be,
particularly if you have multiple
properties, it's a full-time job.
Absolutely. A full-time job. Is that
passive? Like, no. The only like true
passive income would be like you own
treasury bonds and the interest, you
know, you you you actually didn't have
to do anything for that. There's an
opportunity cost in there, so it's not
like purely free money, but dividends,
interest, like that, that could be
considered passive income. But most of
what people consider like the income
hacks that they have. And people get
really crazy about it. They're like,
"Oh, I do consulting and that's passive
income." Like what? That's you you
that's labor is what it is. And so I
think I think it's a great idea, but
people take it definitionually way too
far. My my kids uh have looked this up a
lot in terms of um how they think about
money and like they're exploring their
little ventures and you know in
elementary school they start talking
about it and it continues in middle
school and stuff and one of the things
I've tried to tell them is every form of
passive income that somebody has was
once active income.
>> Extremely active income. And so let's
say the person who is just like clipping
coupons for the treasury bonds that they
Yeah. they probably work their butt off
to make the money that is now an
investment. And you have to factor that
into the passiveness of it. And so
there's there there's a lot of that.
It's I think it's pretty rare that
people truly have a situation where
they're like, I'm making a ton of money
from this thing that I did nothing for
either in the past or today. That's
pretty rare.
>> Do you have a framework that you use for
making the big decisions in life? You
you've talked about sort of switching
houses and I know um you did that a
couple years ago. You also moved from DC
to Seattle. Yeah.
>> How do you like walk me through your
framework for
>> This is definitely not advice because I
don't know if it was a good idea, but
all of those were a spur of the moment
and b pretty haphazard if if I'm being
honest. And is it luck that they by and
large worked out? And I say by and large
because a lot of them didn't. There were
elements of it where it didn't really
work out.
Um, I I think it's true that
particularly the big forks in your life.
It's it's not at all clear which way you
should go. And I think it's also true
that gut feelings tend to actually be
pretty good. That's not just a gut
feeling. That it's just that you can't
crystallize what the thought is, but you
know which way you should go. You know
which way to do it. I think that tends
to be the case. That gut feelings are
actually pretty accurate more more often
than not. Tends to be the case. So, I
didn't if I look back at my decision to
become a writer, my decision to move to
DC, from DC to have kids. We were
talking about this the other day. We
have two kids. My wife and I didn't sit
down and have a deep discussion about,
do we want kids? How many do we want?
What are our parenting philosophies?
After we got married, we're like, I
don't know. I guess we should do it. And
that was just it. But the truth is,
there was a gut feeling there. And the
gut feeling was actually pretty
accurate. So, I think I think people
trusting their gut more often than seems
right. like you don't need to have an
analytical conversation on a spreadsheet
to figure something out.
>> This is the one question I probably get
more than any other question when I'm
giving talks is sort of the relationship
between um your emotions and your
instincts and rational and where we
should be on that spectrum.
>> And the example I always use is sort of
chess.
>> And so chess is not a perfect analogy,
but it works in this case which is the
grand masters have an instinctual move
in their head. if they can't explain
>> and 99.9% of the time that's the move
they make and then why do they take all
this time before they make a turn well
because they're checking they're
verifying that their their instinct is
correct
>> and I think so much of life is that and
Daniel Cond would agree right it's just
slow down your intuitive brain doesn't
mean override it doesn't mean ignore it
let it inform your decision not make
your decision
>> yeah and I also like the idea of like
you got to be very careful with
decisions that are irreversible that are
going to have lasting consequences and
be much less choosy and picky and
analytical about decisions that are
reversible and whatnot. Jeff Bezos talks
about that a lot. There's sometimes
where you make a decision in a business
and you're like, look, if this doesn't
work, we can just go back to what we
were doing before. It's not that big.
Might cost a little bit of money, but we
can go back. And there's some decisions
about like this is a this is this is a
roach motel. Like you we like we we walk
in, we we ain't walking out of this. We
got to make sure it's the right place to
go in. I think there's a lot of
decisions like that in life about you
know even if if it is reversible who you
marry the career that you have where you
live those are reversible decisions but
it's much more difficult to do it and
there's some decisions your reputation
whatnot that are irreversible like if
you lose trust what not you're probably
not getting it back at least anytime
soon and so those irreversible decisions
are the ones where you do want to stop
and take a step back and be like let's
think this through and do it my wife and
I I think I there's plenty of times that
I can think of And we tried to be
analytical about it and try to be like,
"Okay, let's let's talk this through."
And it led us nowhere because most big
decisions don't have a very clear procon
list. It's like I could see it working
out this way. I could see it working out
that way. And like I don't I don't know.
I I could go either way. And those those
are the most difficult when you you are
just using your gut and hoping that it's
right over time.
>> And also not everything on that list is
equally weighted.
>> Yeah. So, that's why I get kind of
frustrated when like the lifestyle gurus
will be like, "Here's how I make here's
here here's how I do this and here's the
the the multi-step process to making
good decision." I'm like, I don't I
don't think that's usually how it works.
It's usually just like ah I think let's
just go with this. That feels like the
right one to do. And obviously some
people are better at that than others at
understanding the consequences and what
they're likely to regret, but I think
most of the time it's it's nothing more
than that.
>> What advice do you have for somebody
living paycheck to paycheck?
Uh, first empathy.
Have been there. Don't want to go back.
Understand and empathize with the idea
that you feel like everyone else is
doing better than you and you're not and
that maybe you're not living the life
that you once foresaw for yourself. So
the first comment I have is empathy for
what they're going through. And the
second I have I always say two things.
One is that all wealth is what you have
minus what you want. And it is so
profoundly common and easy to ignore the
second part of that equation that you
have to minus what you want. And you are
in more in control of that by and large
than what you have. It's very it's it's
possible but not easy to double your
income. Possible but not easy. It is
well within your control even if it's
not easy. It's more within your control
to try to be more content with what you
have and try to lower your expectations
even if you're still an ambitious person
and do that. uh easier said than done,
but I think that it's always going to
play a role. The second is understanding
that independence exists on a spectrum.
And if you can save $1, if you can save
$10, if you can save $100, you're in a
better position than you were before.
And a lot of people in this position
will be like, well, I can't save $5,000
a month, so why save anything? That kind
of mentality. And I think it's every
dollar makes a difference. Particularly
once or twice a decade when you lose
your job or whatever it might be, you're
going to be like, I am so grateful. That
is that $5 you save, that $10 you save
is the oxygen of your life that's going
to allow you to make different decisions
than you otherwise would have had to.
>> I think go deeper on this sort of the
expectations minus what you have.
I mean there there are there are people
and again I say this with empathy not
with any sort of shame or criticism or
telling you you should just be more
grateful for what you have. There are
people who earn very little money and
are totally satisfied with it. And I
think often times that is just unique to
their personality. That's not a
learnable skill. It's not a teachable
skill. It's just who they were. They
were just blessed with that of just
being like I got a little apartment and
a pair of shoes and I'm good. That's all
I need. Those people exist and it makes
and the opposite of that exists too.
Maybe this is a more pertinent example
of the people who make $20 million a
year and feel broke because they their
life is not complete in their mind
unless they were earning 25 million
because that guy over there is earning
25 million. Those people exist
absolutely as well. So you realize the
power of expectations is enormous in how
we feel about ourselves and it is true.
I'll give you I'll give you an
analytical example of this. You have to
be careful with this because you have to
wrap it in the context of of
expectations and and and empathy. But
the average new house today is almost
three times the size of a house in the
1950s. Three times. I read this book
recently on Levittown, which is back in
the 1950s. The Levit brothers, home
builders, build a bunch of uh gigantic
home communities, kind of urban sprawl,
kind of suburban sprawl, I should say,
that created kind of the backbone of
what we knew then and view now as like
middle class America. white picket fence
average people, plumbers, teachers,
firemen, policemen who can have a you
buy a house when they were 25 and raise
their kids in this. And I think it is
often used with the example of like we
don't have that today. Our grandparents
have it. We don't have it today. There
is some truth to that, but the truth is
if you look at what the Levittown house
was, it would be considered low-income
poverty housing today. It was 700 square
f feet. Your four kids shared one
bedroom. It had one bathroom for the six
of you. Forget garage, forget porch,
forget air conditioning, forget any of
that. It was as barebones, basic, tiny,
no frills as it could get. They're also
part of the reason that the Levit
brothers were able to build so many
houses so cheaply is that they were
thrown together like cardboard boxes.
And so that amazing middle class
prosperity house that you have, the leaf
was the the roof was leaking. It was
poorly insulated, like going to by
today's standards, it would be not what
people would think and not what they
would want. And and so it's easy today
to be like, "You used to have it better.
You used to have it better than us." And
I think you have to push back on that a
little bit. If somebody says, "I don't
feel like I'm doing as well as I wanted
and I should." I think that always
demands empathy. If somebody says,
"People used to be doing better than we
are today." That's a factual statement
that can and should be fact checked.
That you you that that is an applesto
apples comparison that you can look at.
And I think most of the time you would
look at that, you would come to some
conclusion that when people make a
statement like people in the 1950s were
better off than we are now. It's usually
not true. But that does not preclude the
feeling that you have today of I'm not
doing as well as I thought I should and
I'm living paycheck to paycheck. Because
I think more often what happens there is
that the expectations over generations
have increased. So in the 1950s a 700
foot house with no garage was amazing.
Felt like a palace. And by today's
standards, it's more along the lines of
I need a 1900 foot house and I better
have air conditioning and a garage,
etc., etc. That's not to call people
spoiled or what not. It's just the
acknowledgement that expectations
increase over time.
>> I remember reading this thing and I
don't know who said it, but it was
basically boiled down to remember there
was a time uh where you wanted what you
have now,
>> right? And I think now some people will
hear that and be like, no, there was
actually a time when I thought I would
have more than I do now. So that I think
that exists too. But for a lot of
people, I'd even say maybe the majority,
there is something there is at least
something going on in your life right
now that you used to aspire to and
probably told yourself that you would be
so happy if you had that thing one day.
>> How did you feel after Same as ever came
out in relation to psychology of money?
And the reason I asked this is this this
relates to anybody who had a massive
success and then all of a sudden they're
back on stage again.
>> Yeah.
I've often I I've said this a million
times. I write for an audience of one,
which is myself. I write books that I
think are interesting about topics that
I'm interested in in a voice and telling
stories that I think is interesting for
me. And I never want to or think about
pandering to you to to the audience. And
so there's part of me that is inherent
in that where I'm just like I I really
don't really care what other people
think of these, good or bad. I'm just
kind of writing them for myself. But
it's true that, you know, my first book,
Psychology of Money, first print runs
5,000 copies, ends up selling about 10
million in counting kind of thing.
great, amazing, but it also sets the
expectations of myself and other people
to a different degree. And so when my
second and now third book comes out,
it's always judged relative to that. And
good problem to have ultimate first
world problem. But you see what's the
irony of it is I write about including
ins and psychology of money and the new
book the power of expectations and how
anything amazing can feel terrible if
your expectations are high enough and
everything anything terrible can feel
amazing if your expectations were low
enough. It is the ultimate arbiter of
like how you're going to feel about
something. And I knew this going into it
that even if same as ever was a book
that I was very proud of, which it is,
and sold well, which it did, it was
always going to be by comparison to this
thing, Psychology of Money, my first
book, that would be graded against it.
And even if I knew going into it, I'd be
lying if I said it wasn't hard. It it
was it was hard. I've talked to other
authors who've been in similar
situations. And I think other kind of
artists who have this thing, whether
you're musician or actors or whatnot, if
your early success was big, it's very
difficult to live up to. I will kind of
name one
example of this I saw recently because I
think they're big enough that I'm
allowed to criticize them a little bit
and everyone has different taste in
music. You two, the band, their albums
in the 1980s
are so unbelievably good. you listen to
Joshua Tree and those you're like every
song is like magic. I'm like how did you
this is so good. The recent albums I I I
I will judge and be like I I I don't
know man. It doesn't doesn't really have
it. And I think at least part of that is
that I'm judging the recent albums
relative to the pure magic that they
produced for years. If you dis if you
don't like that music you probably have
your own example of it. It's okay. But
that that's the case. Everything is
going to be judged relative to your
highest moment in the past. And that's a
very hard thing to deal with. Can you
change your reference point if
intentionally? Can you go into this and
reset the bar so it's not psychology of
money? My bar is like I want to sell 100
copies of the book.
>> I don't know if you can do it
intentionally. I think you can be forced
into it of uh if something terrible
happens in your life, you are able to
say I'm so grateful for it because I
used to be down in these pits of despair
before.
>> Stephen Hawking had a very potent
example of this. the late scientist who
was of course had no control over. He's
paralyzed head to toe and in a
wheelchair.
>> And he talked about that he was so
grateful for life and so happy to wake
up every morning because his
expectations were reduced to zero when
he was 21 years old when he was
diagnosed with this illness and
everything else since then. And there's
been some studies about this of like the
comparison the classic example of who is
happier a lottery winner or a
parapollegic? And the answer is like not
intuitive. It's very often the
parapolgic who uh without diminishing
some of the the obvious pain and
suffering that they've been through will
be like might have a newfound
appreciation for life, might have a
newfound appreciation for sunsets and
things like that. Where the lottery
winner is almost the opposite. When they
win, they're like, "Life's going to be
freaking amazing from here on out." And
when it's not, they're like, "Geez, I
thought it was going to be great. It's
not." So, you get a lot of
counterintuitive results like that.
>> I'm glad you you kept writing. I mean, I
I feel like it can paralyze a lot of
people. If you have such an overwhelming
success on your first book, you might
not want to keep going, but I
personally, for whatever it's worth,
think your writing keeps getting better
and better.
>> One common review of Same as Ever was,
>> and of course, there's a wide spectrum
of comments, but I feel like a a a
median review of it was good book, not
as good as Psychology of Money. And I
always I always been like, man, if I
didn't write Psychology Money, you
probably would have just said good book
and finished it there. And it's okay.
would say great but
>> maybe and so but I think it's inevitable
and it's a it's a good problem to have
but it's interesting that I write about
that power of expectations and
experienced it in a potent way
firsthand.
>> How does our social group impact our
desires and how should we think about
our social group in relation to spending
money? I always say like be very careful
who you socialize with because it will
full stop will set your expectations of
of what you want. And um I I use the
example that I I grew up out in the out
in the mountain sticks outside of Lake
Tahoe and it was very much a a mountain
town, not poor but not rich by any
standards. And uh and then I went to
college in Los Angeles. Los Angeles
during the housing bubble in the
mid-200s when it was just overflowing
with literally trillions of dollars of
fake money and and some people were just
it was such a such a material culture
then and now that like when that fake
money flew around it was just everyone
was just spending it on lifestyle just
inflating everything. And I I realiz
like who was happier? It's not even
close that it was the people in the
middle mountain town were happier
because it was so much easier to keep
your expectations in check. You're like,
it was so easy to be like, look, I drive
a a three-year-old Ford pickup and the
the rich guy drives a two-year-old Ford
pickup. And that's the that's the
stratification. The stratification was
this big. And then in LA, the
stratification was 10 miles long. And
so, even if you are a dentist doing well
in LA, you're a dentist making 300 grand
a year driving a Mercedes, you're
absolutely amazing, crushing it. But no
dentist in LA making 300 grand a year
feels like they're crushing it because
they are driving past 30,000 foot
mansions and Rolls-Royces and
Lamborghinis and whatnot. And so by
comparison, even if you're not
socializing with those people, you're
aware of it. But when you start
socializing them with those people, then
truly your expectations just blow off
the charts. It's very difficult. It's
possible, but it's very difficult to be
a dentist making 300 grand and be
friends with someone who's living in a
30,000 foot mansion with a private jet
and have it not impact your
expectations. Very difficult to do.
>> We keep coming back to happiness. Is
that something we should be optimizing
for?
>> I think we said earlier what you want to
optimize for is contentment. And when
you socialize with people who are
dramatically wealthy, are living a
better a bigger life than you, it is
much harder to remain content. possible
but harder to remain content and so
being careful who you socialize with I
think is is very important that's true
for a lot of things not just outside
money but values it's very easy to think
today I have these the boundary of my
morality is this but the truth is like
if I started hanging out with different
people it might become this the
boundaries of my moral or sorry it might
shrink it might the what I'm willing to
do might be very influenced by who I'm
hanging out with I think that's true for
nearly all of us
>> one of the things I admire about you as
your friend is that you've built this
life that is just totally authentic to
you. What advice do you have for other
people about going about building this
life that's authentic to them,
discovering who they are as a person and
how they can use finances as a tool to
accomplish that.
>> One is I would I would say thank you for
for saying that and and noticing that.
But it's it takes work. It is not just
you get there and you're like, "Oh,
everything's great. Now I can just
cruise on this authentic life." It takes
I think daily work. And so even as
someone who writes about expectations
and keeping up with the Joneses and
whatnot, I think I feel I have to remind
myself daily of it. Now there are a lot
of things in like that in life. If you
master meditation, you don't get to
stop. You got to do it every day. And if
you do stop, you just revert back to
where you were. See, with exercise, you
don't get to physical fitness and then
you get to stop. You got to work on it
daily. So I think this is one of those
things as well that takes a lot of
effort. But I think the realization,
easier said than done, but the
realization and the observation that
people are not paying attention to you
as much as you think they are. And
therefore, you should stop trying to
impress strangers and use money to give
yourself
a tool of things that are giving you a
lot of fulfillment, your relationships,
your health, and whatnot. That's to to
me that was like the biggest
breakthrough. And it's so simple. Like
there's nothing that profound about what
I just said, but if you can actually
come to terms with it, it can totally
change your life of just being like,
"Nobody's watching. Nobody's watching.
They're not paying attention to me. They
don't care what I'm wearing. They don't
care what car I'm driving. But if I can
instead use that money to be independent
and be able to make my own decisions
about what's authentic to me, that's
that's amazing. You've you've known me
for I don't know 15 years or so. And you
have known I've I've been open with you
about my personal life and you knew me
during my cheap, frugal years, right?
And I think in a in a playful, friendly,
respectful way. You you would give me
grief for it.
>> Yeah.
>> And I I kind of in a way I liked the
grief
>> because it was a reminder that I was
being independent, that I wasn't a slave
to anyone else's expectations. I I think
I kind of reveled in that at the time.
It was it was consistent with my
personality, the lifestyle that I was
living. But I almost enjoyed the
reminder that I am not just a pawn to
somebody else's expectations that I'm
doing this my way.
>> Oh yeah. But I also admired that you
just didn't care. You didn't give a [__]
about what other people thought. So like
I would tease you about wine sometimes
and you were just
>> I still don't have the pallet for that.
>> Yeah. You were just like whatever. Like
I don't care.
>> You would hand me an expensive glass and
I'd be like is this Charles Shaw? I
don't know. What is this? Two buck Chuck
Shane. What is this? But I I think we in
a as as good friends do would give each
other grief for it. But I actually I I
feel like if people are not giving you
grief for something in your lifestyle,
you're you're you're probably just uh a
sheep to somebody else's. If if you can
if you can look at particularly someone
who is above average income and there
isn't something in their life that they
spend very little on, I think there's a
high chance that they're just a sheep
going along with society tells them they
should want. And so I love it when you
meet a rich person who dresses shabby or
eats shabby or drives a shabby car.
There has to be something like that that
they realize like that thing society
told them they should like it but they
just don't. Now they should probably
also have a thing that they spend a
higher percentage of their own of their
income on like that's important too. But
the the idea that you should just do it
your own way with the idea that nobody's
watching because the truth is nobody is
watching.
>> We recorded with a billionaire. It was
so funny in the summer here in this very
studio and I walked in and he's like
eating cava for lunch and I was just
like this is amazing.
>> That's how it should be.
>> Um
>> because it's delicious.
>> Yeah.
>> And wouldn't it suck if you loved cava
>> but you're like I'm a billionaire. I got
to eat caviar and then you're just
choking down the salty nastiness of the
caviar. Wouldn't that Isn't that a bad
life?
>> 100%.
>> I love Taco Bell.
>> Can't get enough of Taco Bell. Love it.
>> What's your go-to? uh nacho cheese
chicken chalupa
so good and they cost like a buck and
they're just it's just the cheapest
dirtiest food but god it tastes good
there's this you know Rob Henderson he's
a academic amazing writer he has this
heristic I love he says rich people food
looks better than it tastes and poor
people food tastes better than it looks
>> 100%
>> so Taco Bell looks nasty so good
>> caviar looks great so nasty
>> I remember I I gave a talk once in San
Francisco and at the end of it they took
me to this Michelin starred restaurant
and it was so fancy and it was so set up
and they brought like 13 courses or
whatever it was and the whole time I was
there I was looking across the street at
this burger joint. Can I get some pizza
please?
>> A line out the window and I was like I
just want a burger.
>> I had a just want a burger.
>> A is it two What's the highest Michelin
star? Is it three?
>> Three three
>> I think it was that. I I had a three
star Michelin meal one time. This is
last summer in Europe.
>> And uh I found it very mediocre at best.
And some of the dishes I found
bad, legitimately bad. And they looked
beautiful and it was expensive and the
atmosphere was amazing. But I think
that's the perfect heristic of like rich
food looks better than it tastes. I
think that's true.
>> What do you splurge on?
I this is this seems like a cheating
answer, but I think I splurge on
independence because that's how I view
it. I have a very high savings rate, but
that's not how I view it. I view it as I
buy independence. I purchase little
claim checks of independence.
>> But what what do you splurge on that you
spend on like actually like
>> I won't give examples in I travel pretty
well. I don't travel cheap and I value
that because I travel a lot. So I feel
like it's almost a necessity to keep my
sanity. So that's something that I don't
I don't cheap out on. My wife is a is a
very talented gardener, landscaper, and
until recent years, I did not realize
trees and rocks could cost so much, but
she has proven that that it can. And I
and I love it. She loves it. We love it.
So, there are things where it's like
that's important to my comfort when I
travel, to her identity at home to do
these things. And it's like, great, no
budget. Just go do it. It's fun.
Awesome. Love it. And other people might
might not value either of those things,
but that's that's almost the point. We
do. I think that is the point of money
is spending it where you value it. And I
always ask myself and others like what
would you do if nobody was watching?
>> Yeah.
>> What would you wear? What would you
>> If nobody was watching she would garden
exactly as she does.
>> Yeah.
>> And if nobody was watching I would
travel exactly as I do.
>> But isn't that like that's the pinnacle?
Like that is in a way a definition of
success.
>> Just doing what you want, whatever it
might be. Because I think there's other
people who are much wealthier than you
and I who fly coach or don't value
landscaping whatsoever. And that's okay.
That's like you got to find your thing.
>> Yeah. I think for people who travel all
the time like you and I, um travel
definitely becomes something that you
probably spend what your younger self
would consider an obscene amount of
money on.
>> Yeah.
>> I I fly every week. The fact that I fly
first class and they serve a meal on a
tray, it's not a luxury. I'm trying to
survive here. It's the only meal I get
today. This is like a necessity. Now, of
course, it's it's a privilege, but
that's how I view it. It's like it's not
a luxury. It's the only way that I can
fly every week and keep my sanity.
>> Yeah. Or flying overseas and giving a
talk the next day.
>> I got I got to lay flat. I got to do it
or else I can't give the talk the next
day. Now, I've got that all wrapped in
like of course I could, but it's a it's
a luxury that I'm easily willing to
spend money on.
>> What can history teach us about
inflation and how can we what advice
would you have for somebody today about
dealing with inflation?
I think the history is that it is
everpresent. There's there's never
people get very and I maybe they're
right to do this very upset at
inflation. Um then again maybe they're
right to do that because it's it's very
often a a policy error or failure but
there is no history without inflation.
It doesn't doesn't really exist. That's
not really a thing. So I think I feel
like a lot of people on the on the uh uh
what what are the the the the stages of
grief? You know, there's a stage of of
the stages of dealing with it. A lot of
people get stuck on anger and I feel
like I've just moved on to acceptance of
it. I I don't get that angry about it. I
I accept that it's going to be there at
higher rates that I would prefer and
occasionally very high rates that can be
destructive, but I don't necessarily get
angry about it because I feel like it's
inevitable within history. And the idea
that I should be awaiting for a world in
which prices are stable all the time and
perpetuity is never going to happen. So,
I'm not going to waste my time waiting
for it. All the time you spend thinking
about something you don't control comes
at the expense of something you do
control, like saving an extra dollar or
sort of buying more independence. I love
that idea of buying independence money.
>> And that that doesn't mean that you
shouldn't be angry or vote when
politicians
screw up and cause inflation. It's not
that. But I think people have some
people have too high expectations for
what they expected to be eventually in
an era in a way that's never going to be
there. I think that's true for a lot of
things, for marriages, for friendships.
If your expectations for perfection, if
you have expectations of perfection in
an area where people are imperfect and I
have bad days, my wife has bad days, you
need to have a some tolerance,
reasonable level of intolerance for
imperfection is important and I think
you can apply that framework to how
people think about inflation.
>> It seems like pace affects a lot of what
we do financially and by pace I mean we
know the path to get wealthy at least
generally speaking in life. It's to save
a little bit of money, dollar cost
average into index funds and repeat for
20, 30, 40 years. Yeah. And and that is
about as sure of a path to gain
>> wealth. Not not 100% but among the shest
paths that are there.
>> And yet we have this lack of patience in
part because we see other people getting
wealthier faster than us. And I have the
saying, a lack of patience changes the
outcome. But in this sense, it changes
our behavior. Yeah. And because it ch oh
like I want to invest in whatever this
get-rich quick scheme is or how do you
think about that?
>> I think it there is a lot of there's an
unfortunate truth with a lot of this
stuff that people's personalities are
wired at birth and that's just how
they're wired. And I think that includes
people who are wired for long-term
thinking and some some people who are
just not. I I'm making this up. This is
not an actual study, but I've always
thought that 10% of people do not need
financial advice. They just get it
intuitively. They came out of the womb
understanding compound interest. They
they're savers from the day that they
earn their first dollar. They just get
it. Nobody has to tell them. Another 10%
of people cannot be helped. They're
compulsive gamblers. It doesn't matter
what you tell them, what information you
give them, they're always going to make
terrible decisions. It's probably true
for health as well. Um, and so I I think
inherit that is that there is a lot of
this. This is just who we are. And some
people are more impatient than others. I
do think there is a thing where even so
so within that framework that I just
said 10% don't be need help 10% can't
need help. That leaves 80% who want and
need good advice and can be influenced
with good information. And I think
within that there is a lot of things I
I've done a lot of work with high school
students. I'm talking about money and
investing and whatnot. And it is
inevitable every single time without
exception that these very smart, very
intelligent high schoolers, somebody
will raise their hand and ask some
version of the question, "What penny
stock should I buy to double my money
tomorrow?" And I have to remind myself
that like I can't criticize that because
I think that is the natural intuition
for some people. If if they might think
they're a long-term investor and their
definition of long-term is a month.
>> Yeah.
>> And that maybe that's not they think
that's that's not a bad thing. There are
other things in life where a month is a
long time.
um you know if you're if you're you know
I don't know what the example would be
if you're cleaning your kitchen a month
is a long time to get it done in so like
there are some things where you just
need to understand what we say when we
mean long term and historically when we
talk about the stock market a good
definition of long-term of like really
putting the odds of success in your
favor is probably 10 years of putting
like earning a real rate of return after
inflation even within the cyclicality of
the economy you should be investing for
at least minimum 10 years if not 20 30
40 and so a lot of that's like that it
would never cross their mind that that's
what we're talking about when we say
long-term. And particularly for young
people with no experience, they're like,
I'm a long-term investor. I'm going to
hold for the next three months. And they
really think that that's a rational
statement. And so part of this is just
understanding the historical context of
what patience means in investing. And
how we teach this has such an impact.
And you mentioned high school students.
So one of my kids last year came home
and he's like, "We're having an
investing competition in class." And I
was like, "Well, tell me about this
competition." And it was basically a
weekly competition to see who could make
the most money.
>> I did this in fifth grade, too. We had
the same thing. It was pick stocks and
then we'll track it. And it was like who
makes the most money in the next week.
>> I was like, but you're not investing.
You're speculating. This is gambling.
>> Speculation. And then there is a truth
that like nothing can be more damaging
to your investing psychology than
getting rich very quick when you're
young.
>> I think it just ruins you.
>> It gives you this expectation. I
remember in 2021, which was kind of like
the peak of the meme meme stock mania.
The market was just going vertical. I
remember this young person tweeting me
and basically saying, "If you can't
double your money every month, you have
no idea what you're doing investing."
And I remember being like, "Yeah, good
luck to you, sir." Like, but I also
don't fault that because I think if you
started investing in 2021 and you just
started buying options on meme stocks,
you're like, "Oh, this is easy. Just
double my money every week. It's not
that hard." Like, you have no context
for what the base rate of success is.
And so that's I think that's really
important like becoming a student of
investing history and understanding what
to expect historically and the base
rates around that is very very important
because you can become so influenced and
blinded by the expectations of your
first six months of investing good or
bad in a way that can like lead you to
really poor expectations. Do you know
the investor Jeremy Grantham?
>> Yeah.
>> Very famous investor, very smart
investor, uh successful investor,
notoriously
known for being bearish. Not always, but
historically tends to be pretty bearish.
I remember reading this thing that he
began his career in the teeth of a
vicious bare market. That was his early
experience. And everything we know about
psychology is like early experiences
leave scars. They stick around for a
long time. So you can easily imagine an
alternative history where Jeremy
Grantham started his career during a
tech bubble and became a momentum
investor like sky's the limit kind of
person.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe not. But I think that tends to be
true that we are all just like products
of our early experiences. So you have to
be very careful not anchoring too much
to that to the extent that you can.
>> I want to come back to the index funds
for a second. One of the comments we had
before was people wanted to know what
specific index funds you invest in.
>> Yeah.
>> And what the allocation within those is.
So if you had 100% of your money into
index funds, what percentage is in
which?
>> The vast majority is a Vanguard total
stock market index VTI. Not all of it,
but the vast vast majority is that it is
as broad as you can get. It basically
owns every stock in every company in
every industry in every size in the US.
I really don't own much of any. No, I
don't own any international funds. Uh
part of that is um I don't think you
necessarily need to because even among
US-based companies are doing half their
revenue or more overseas and so you get
international exposure even within that.
I know people some people would push
back at that and disagree that different
markets have cycles at different times
so you should diversify but I've never I
just want to keep it simple. I think
that's maybe the point. Even when people
would be like, "Oh, you shouldn't own
VTI. You shouldn't own this index. You
should own international exposure." I'm
like, "We could twist that wheel all
day." Like, I just want to keep it
simple. I own a slice of US capitalism
and that is totally adequate for me and
just keep it going from there. So, I
just the purpose is to keep it as
brainless as possible so that I can
focus all of my attention on what I
think actually matters, which is
endurance and longevity.
>> So, you're a smart guy. So, you own VTI.
all what is the S&P 500 right now? I
mean the vast majority of that that's
weighted. So
>> yeah um
>> the correlation between the S&P 500 500
companies and VTI 7,000 companies is
very very high.
>> So a large historically at least a large
percentage of that is made up of the top
10 companies
>> or the top three let's say. Yeah. and
you're smart and you hear this and
you're like, "Well, I know history would
indicate that this is going to go
sideways, so I should sell my index
funds." Or how do you think through this
or like how do you keep going from
>> I wouldn't pretend to think that I'm
smart enough to preemptively do that
given how complex the world is. The
world is a just infinitely complex
machine with as many moving parts and
levers and gears and gizmos as you can
possibly imagine. And it is so complex
in the sense of like you twist one knob
and a bunch of conveyor belts a mile
down the road start acting funny. It's
just it works in very complex ways. But
I think it's still intuitive for people
to come up and be like, "Ah, what if we
pull this lever? Let's see what happens.
What if we hit this with a hammer? Let's
see what happens." And like I don't want
to fool myself into thinking that I can
uh figure out something that is
infinitely complex, 7 billion people,
hundreds of different cultures, millions
of different companies, infinite trends,
different possibilities that could have
played out. I I think I can be like,
"Oh, let me just pull up Excel and I'm
going to I'm going to calculate this and
figure it out." Like, who am I kidding
that I can do that? I think there are
people who are extremely smart and lucky
who can do that. But I I I I am neither
I am neither the former or do I want to
rely on the latter. That is one of the
lessons I try to teach my kids is, you
know, when they're going through these
investing competitions, we start talking
about finances and investing and I'm
like, you know, there's people who are
the smartest people in the world who do
this full-time and they literally want
to take your money and make it their
money.
How do you plan to compete if you're
picking individual stocks in that world?
Yeah.
>> And then I bring up you and I'm like,
well, Morgan has this thing where, you
know, you don't have to be outstanding.
You just have to last a longer than
everybody else and be average.
>> Yeah.
>> And the truth is like, if I can be
average for 30 years, I will beat the
vast majority of people who try. Not all
of them, but the vast majority of
people. And the idea that let's say if I
can be average for 50 years, I'll end up
in the top 3% of investors. That's
probably about where it'll be
historically has been the case. That I
will outperform 97% of people who tried
to beat the market. And maybe it's even
more. Maybe it's after tax it's 99%. Um
the idea that being in the top 3% or the
top 1% is not good enough is insane to
me. That in any other endeavor if they
could say, "Hey, if you do nothing with
no effort, you'll end up in the top 3%."
The idea that I would say not good
enough. I need to devote my life into
getting into the top 2%. Has never
appealed to me. If that appeals to you,
more power to you. And I think a lot of
people love the intellectual stimulation
of picking stocks
>> and following markets. I follow markets
every day. I have been I followed the
stock market every day for 22 years
because I think it's a f it's a
fascinating window into the world. But
never would I say like I need to devote
myself to predicting where this is going
to go next so that instead of being in
the top 3% I can maybe maybe be in the
top 2%.
>> So today markets are at an all-time
high. You get a royalty check. Do you
plop that into an index fund or do you
drip it in? You're like, "Okay, well
I'll do this over the next six months or
12 months or do you just take it all and
plop it in on whatever day you get it?"
>> In the last 5 years, every book check
that I've gotten uh it's 40% to taxes
the rest of stocks. just simple, just
brand
>> the exact same day you get it. You don't
you don't average it in. It's like
whatever day that happens to be, that's
what it is.
>> That's what it is.
>> And you don't think twice about the fact
that it's an all-time high or
>> No. And I wouldn't defend that and say
that that's historically the best thing
to do. I think that probably is the
case. But
>> again, even if even if someone smarter
than me could say, "Oh, you should do it
this way. You should use this
distribution strategy. You should you
should trickle in whatnot." I'm like,
"Yeah, but I I keep it simple. I just I
just keep it. I I I don't care that you
have a whisbang formula for me that's
going to make it better. The the point
is it's simple. And just like if if
you're eating pizza that tastes good and
someone's like, you know, if you
sprinkle this on it and if you cooked it
for one minute longer and use filtered
water in the dough, it t like would you
shut up? I like my pizza. It's
delicious. And that's how I think about
investing.
>> Yeah.
>> That that's what I want to tell people.
I want to be like shut up. I'm enjoying
myself.
>> As you know, we always ask the same
question at the end. It's so cool with
you because this is the third time we've
chatted and to see your definition
evolve over time, but we always end with
what is success for you.
>> I I think about two things. It's I I
love the idea of it's very important to
have people in your life that you don't
want to disappoint. I think we started
the conversation with that as I'm
repeating here full circle.
>> And uh and so those few people in my
life,
>> success is not disappointing them. And I
know I'm not perfect and there will be
times when they look at me and say,
"Morgan, I wish you had done this
differently. You didn't consider my
feelings enough when you did this." But
there's a couple people in my life who I
really really don't want to disappoint.
And it would be hard. There was no
amount of financial material
uh success in life in which I could look
back at my life and say I had a great
life if I really disappointed my kids or
my wife or my parents. Hard to imagine
that. And so even when relationships
don't work out, I think really
disappointing the people that you don't
want to. I think that's that that's
fundamental to my definition of success.
Yeah,
>> I love that, man.
>> I think I also think related to that,
loyalty to people who deserve your
loyalty is a very rewarding thing. The
important thing is people who deserve
your loyalty, which is a small list. A
lot of people do not deserve your
loyalty. Uh but loyalty to someone who
deserves your loyalty is unbelievably
rewarding. And so that I think about
that a lot too.
>> Go deeper on that. What does that mean
to be?
>> It gives me a tremendous amount of good
feeling to look at my kids and basically
say no matter how poorly you treat me, I
will always be there for you. You
deserve my loyalty and I'm going to give
it to you. I've worked at the
collaborative fund for 10 years. Craig
Shapiro, the guy who runs it. Even when
I get to a point in my career when I
don't need to work there anymore. Craig
deserves my loyalty. He bet on me when
he didn't need to. When I needed him,
but he didn't need me. He bet on He
deserves my loyalty. And I it feels
good. It feels not just good. It feels
tremendous to give it to him. He
deserves it. And so I think when you
experience that in life, when somebody
deserves your loyalty and you give it
back, it's not just rewarding to the
other person, it's rewarding for you
personally.
>> I love that. Thank you for taking the
time today, Morgan.
>> Thanks, Shane. Let's do it a fourth time
in the future.